2014. évi XXIX. törvény

Magyarország Kormánya és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság Kormánya között Magyarország fegyveres erői és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság fegyveres erői tagjainak a másik állam területén történő ideiglenes tartózkodásáról szóló megállapodás kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság Kormánya között Magyarország fegyveres erői és a Német Szövetségi Köztársaság fegyveres erői tagjainak a másik állam területén történő ideiglenes tartózkodásáról szóló megállapodás (a továbbiakban: Megállapodás) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Megállapodás hiteles angol és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„Agreement between the Government of Hungary and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Temporary Stays of Members of the Defence Forces of Hungary and of the Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany in the Territory of the Other State (Hungarian-German Visiting Forces Agreement)

The Government of Hungary

and

the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany

(together referred to as the „Parties”) -

considering the Agreement between the Parties to the North Atlantic Treaty regarding the Status of their Forces, done at London on 19 June 1951 (hereinafter: „NATO SOFA”),

desiring to establish supplementary rules for temporary stays of members of the German Armed Forces in Hungary and members of the Defence Forces of Hungary in the Federal Republic of Germany,

considering that under the provisions of the present Agreement, the rights and obligations of the Parties under international agreements establishing international tribunals, including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, shall remain unaffected -

have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Definitions

(1) The Parties agree that the terms and definitions determined in Article I paragraph 1 of the NATO SOFA shall apply to the terms in the present Agreement.

(2) The term „members of the Armed Forces” shall mean the members of the force of the Parties and their civilian component.

Article 2

Purpose of the Agreement

(1) The purpose of the present Agreement extends to the entry, exit and temporary stay of members of the Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany (Bundeswehr) and the Defence Forces of Hungary (hereinafter together: „Armed Forces”) in the territory of the other State.

(2) The provisions of the NATO SOFA shall remain unaffected by the provisions of this Agreement.

Article 3

Type, Scope and Duration of Stays

(1) Temporary stays of members of the Armed Forces under this Agreement shall serve the purpose of exercises, training of units and transit by land as well as carrying out humanitarian relief actions and search and rescue operations under the responsibility of the competent authorities of the Receiving State with up to three thousand (3,000) members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State for a duration of stay which shall as a general rule not exceed thirty (30) days.

(2) For individual members of the Armed Forces performing liaison and advisory functions and for training purposes, stays of up to two (2) years’ duration with an option for extension may be agreed.

(3) Details concerning the type, scope and duration of these stays shall be coordinated between the competent authorities of the Parties.

Article 4

Terms of Entry, Exit and Stay

(1) Notwithstanding the provisions in Article III of the NATO SOFA, authorisation for entry, exit and temporary stay of members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State under the present Agreement shall be governed by the national legal provisions of the Receiving State.

(2) With regard to the weapons imported into or carried within the Receiving State by the Armed Forces of the Sending State, the following provisions shall apply:

a) The competent authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany shall specify, in consultation with the competent authorities of Hungary, the number and type of war weapons and other weapons imported into or carried within the Federal Republic of Germany as well as the registration and/or reporting requirements for such weapons. Licences required under the war weapons control legislation of the Federal Republic of Germany, as well as foreign trade licenses, shall be deemed to have been granted for any war weapons (pursuant to Part B of the War Weapons List - Annex to section 1 paragraph 1 of the War Weapons Control Act - as far as the war weapons in question are neither antipersonnel mines nor cluster munitions) that members of the Defence Forces of Hungary will import or carry. Nuclear, biological and chemical weapons (Part A of the War Weapons List) as well as antipersonnel mines and cluster munitions, must not be imported by the Defence Forces of Hungary into the Federal Republic of Germany or carried on the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany.

b) The competent authorities of Hungary shall not require any licences or permits for weapons imported, brought into or carried within the territory of Hungary by the Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany within the framework of this Agreement. The competent authorities of Hungary, in consultation with the competent authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany, may determine the quantity, type of as well as the registration and/or reporting requirements for such weapons. The Armed Forces of the Federal Republic of Germany or agents thereof are not authorised to import, bring into or carry within the territory of Hungary any nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, antipersonnel mines or cluster munitions.

Article 5

Public Security and Order

Should public security and order of the Receiving State be threatened by a member of the Sending State’s Armed Forces, the Receiving State may demand the immediate removal of that member from the territory of the Receiving State. The Sending State’s authorities shall comply with such demands for removal within thirty (30) days.

Article 6

Public Health

(1) The Sending State undertakes to observe international and the Receiving State’s national health regulations. Members of its Armed Forces may upon entry into the Receiving State for the purpose of their temporary stay be requested to present an official health certificate issued by the authorities of the Sending State, confirming that they do not suffer from communicable diseases. The competent military authorities of the Receiving State shall notify the competent military authorities of the Sending State of any existing requirements to that effect not later than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled date of entry.

(2) The competent military authorities of the Parties shall ensure that information exchange pursuant to paragraph 1 above is mutually facilitated.

(3) As regards the prevention and control of communicable diseases in humans, animals and plants as well as the control of organisms harmful to plants and plant products in the Receiving State, the relevant national legislation of the Receiving State shall apply. The competent authorities of the Receiving State shall take measures under infection protection, epizootic disease control and food laws, phytosanitary measures with regard to plants, plant products and other articles as well as measures pursuant to drug, medical devices and sanitary control laws in compliance with obligations under international agreements.

Article 7

Criminal Jurisdiction and Coercive Measures

(1) In cases when, in accordance with Article VII paragraph 3 sub-paragraph b of the NATO SOFA, the Receiving State has the primary right to exercise criminal jurisdiction over members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State, the competent authorities of the Receiving State shall waive this right unless essential interests of the Receiving State’s administration of justice make such exercise of criminal jurisdiction imperative.

(2) Essential interests of administration of justice may make the exercise of criminal jurisdiction imperative in particular in the following cases:

a) criminal offences of significant importance detrimental to the security of the Receiving State,

b) criminal offences causing the death of a human being as well as serious offences against physical integrity and sexual autonomy.

Criminal liability for the offences mentioned in sub-paragraphs a and b above shall be governed by the law of the Receiving State.

(3) If the exercise of criminal jurisdiction is waived, the Sending State shall, at the request of the Receiving State, remove the suspect from the territory of the Receiving State without delay. Having waived the exercise of criminal jurisdiction, the (former) Receiving State may request in specific isolated cases to be informed of the criminal proceedings against the suspects who returned to the Sending State.

(4) The competent courts and authorities of the Parties’ States shall, within the limits imposed by their respective national legislation and obligations under international agreements, render each other legal assistance in support of criminal proceedings. If the Receiving State does not waive the exercise of criminal jurisdiction, the Sending State shall use its influence, to the extent that its legal system permits, to induce members of its Armed Forces suspected of having committed a criminal offence while staying in the Receiving State, to turn themselves in to the courts and authorities of the Receiving State, insofar as the law of the Receiving State obliges them to do so. If the suspect has returned to the Sending State and paragraph 3 does not apply, the Sending State shall, at the request of the Receiving State, submit the case to the competent authorities of the Sending State for a decision to initiate criminal proceedings.

(5) The courts and authorities of the Receiving State shall have the right, within the limits of their jurisdiction and competence, to order and carry out coercive measures against members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State during their stay in the Receiving State.

(6) When a member of the Armed Forces of the Sending State has been arrested by the authorities of the Receiving State or other coercive measures are taken resulting in detention, the competent authority of the Receiving State shall notify the Sending State’s diplomatic mission in the Receiving State without delay. This notification shall state which court or authority has competence over the further proceedings.

(7) The courts and authorities of the Sending State shall not exercise their criminal jurisdiction in the Receiving State.

(8) Whenever, in the course of criminal proceedings in the Receiving State against a member of the Armed Forces of the Sending State, it becomes necessary to determine whether an act or omission was done in the performance of official duty, such determination shall be made in accordance with the law of the Sending State. An authority designated by the Sending State may, at the request of the Receiving State, issue a certificate thereon for submission by the Receiving State to its competent authorities which shall take it into appropriate account in accordance with their national law.

Article 8

Telecommunications

(1) The use of publicly offered telecommunications services in the Receiving State shall be subject both to the general regulations of the Receiving State and the respective terms of business of the provider of the services; this applies in particular to the way in which charges are calculated and accounts rendered and settled.

(2) Subject to the approval of the competent authorities of the Receiving State, members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State may, insofar as this is necessary to achieve the purpose of their stay, set up and operate telecommunications facilities, including radio systems, on a temporary basis.

(3) Radio systems and telecommunications terminal equipment of the Sending State’s Armed Forces that are to be operated in the territory of the Receiving State or hooked up to connections or transmission lines of the public telecommunications networks shall meet the basic technical requirements generally applicable to radio systems and telecommunications terminal equipment under the law of the Receiving State. Compliance with these requirements shall be proven in a conformity assessment procedure and markings to that effect shall be affixed to the equipment.

(4) Members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State, while staying in the Receiving State, shall only use radio frequencies which they have been assigned by the competent authorities of the Receiving State unless the equipment operates on frequencies usable without individual rights of use. The relevant request for radio frequency assignment shall be filed not later than forty-two (42) days prior to the scheduled beginning of use. At the end of the stay, the radio frequencies shall be returned to the competent authorities of the Receiving State.

(5) The members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall take all necessary measures to avoid interference to the Receiving State’s telecommunications networks by their own telecommunications or other electrical installations. Where radio stations of the Armed Forces of the Sending State cause harmful radio interference with radio stations located outside the Receiving State or suffer harmful interference from such stations, the competent authorities of the Receiving State shall act in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and Convention of the International Telecommunication Union, as amended, and the Radio Regulations. The competent authorities of the Receiving State shall take all necessary measures, to the extent authorised by existing regulations, to avoid interference to telecommunications facilities of the Sending State’s Armed Forces by telecommunications or other electrical installations of the Receiving State. In the event of electro-magnetic interference, the national regulations concerning electromagnetic compatibility of equipment shall apply. If this results in the need to take the source of interference out of operation, the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall do so without delay.

Article 9

Environmental Protection

(1) The Parties recognise and acknowledge the importance of environmental protection in the context of activities performed by the members of their Armed Forces in the territory of the other State. The members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall comply with the Receiving State’s legal provisions for the protection of the environment.

(2) The competent authorities of the Parties shall work closely together in all matters of environmental protection, in particular in the preparation of exercises.

(3) Compliance with the legal provisions of the Receiving State notwithstanding, degradation of the environment shall be avoided, and where degradation of the environment cannot be avoided, appropriate environmental protection measures shall be taken to offset such degradation.

(4) For the movement of weapons, heavy equipment or hazardous material, preference shall be given to rail and water transport. Transport routes and means shall be agreed between the Ministries of Defence in coordination with the competent authorities of the Receiving State.

(5) The members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall operate their aircraft, vessels and vehicles in the Receiving State only with fuels, lubricants and additives classified as low-pollutant under the regulations of the Receiving State, provided that this is compatible with the technical requirements of such aircraft, vessels and vehicles. With respect to passenger cars and utility vehicles, the regulations of the Receiving State concerning the limitation of noise and exhaust gas emissions shall be observed insofar as this is not an undue burden.

(6) When using training installations, the members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall observe the applicable rules for their use, in particular safety, fire protection and environmental regulations. The same applies with respect to the administrative regulations of the Armed Forces of the Receiving State relating to exercises. The Ministries of Defence of the Parties’ States shall establish special administrative measures within their respective areas of competence for night firing and firing on Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays.

(7) The members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall comply with the regulations of the Receiving State concerning environmentally safe recycling or other disposal of waste. Disposal of non-expended munitions by detonation or incineration at installations not approved for this purpose shall not be permitted.

Article 10

Operation of Vehicles of the Sending State’s Armed Forces and Use of the Receiving State’s Airfields

(1) Motor vehicles and trailers of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall be registered and licensed for road use by the competent authority of the Sending State.

(2) Transports and movements carried out by the members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State within the scope of the national legal provisions of the Receiving State and applicable international agreements between the Parties, including related technical arrangements and procedures, as well as legal acts of the European Union, shall be deemed approved. In cases where special or exceptional authorisations and exemptions for the transportation of hazardous material are required for military movements and transports, they shall be processed by the competent authorities of the Receiving State. The competent authorities of the Sending State shall inform the military authorities of the Receiving State concerning the technical details of the movements and transports in due time.

(3) The military authorities of the Receiving State shall coordinate the representation of the Sending State’s military interests in administering transportation vis-à-vis civilian authorities and enterprises.

(4) With regard to the registration of the Sending State’s own railway freight and passenger cars needed for transports of members of the Armed Forces and military equipment of the Sending State, the use of the Receiving State’s railway infrastructure and the pertinent safety regulations, European Union regulations and their translation into the Receiving State’s regulations as well as the Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail (COTIF) shall apply. Where it is intended to deviate from the Receiving State’s legal provisions in respect of the requirements for the qualitative condition and the use of the Sending State’s railway vehicles, the railway company of the Sending State shall apply to the transport authorities of the Receiving State for the necessary permits.

(5) Members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State shall observe the Receiving State’s traffic regulations, including the regulations concerning behaviour at the scene of an accident and the regulations on the transportation of hazardous material. The competent authorities of the Receiving State shall monitor observance of these regulations. The competent authorities of the Sending State shall assist in the conduct of such monitoring. The Sending State shall observe basic traffic safety regulations of the Receiving State; within the limits imposed by these regulations, the members of the Sending State’s Armed Forces may apply their own national standards to the planning, construction, design and equipment of motor vehicles, trailers, inland waterway vessels and aircraft. The authorities of the Parties shall consult closely on the implementation of these provisions.

(6) The operation of motor vehicles and trailers whose dimensions, axle load, total weight or numbers exceed limitations under the Receiving State’s road traffic law shall, except in cases of emergency, be subject to the permission of the competent authorities of the Receiving State. Outside training areas, tracked vehicles shall as a general rule not be moved other than by rail or, if required, by flatbed trailer. Driving tracked vehicles on public roads and trails without track pads shall not be permitted.

(7) Except in cases of emergency, members of the Armed Forces of the Sending State may use civilian airports or airports usable for civilian and military purposes in the Receiving State with military aircraft registered as such by the Sending State only with the permission of the competent authorities of the Receiving State granted in accordance with the regulations in force in the Receiving State.

(8) The competent authorities of the Parties shall coordinate all air traffic control and related communications systems set up and operated by them to the extent necessary to ensure air traffic safety and achievement of the purpose of the stay of the members of their Armed Forces.

Article 11

Settlement of Claims

(1) The Parties shall inform each other which authorities are competent to settle claims. These authorities shall cooperate in good faith. They shall render each other all possible assistance to ensure compliance with judgments and administrative acts of the courts and authorities of the Receiving State in connection with obligations of the members of the Armed Forces and their civilian component under civil law.

(2) For the settlement of third party claims, the following provisions shall apply in addition to Article VIII, paragraphs 5 to 7, of the NATO SOFA, with the procedure provided for in Article VIII paragraph 6 sub-paragraphs a to c being supplemented by the procedure set out in sub-paragraph f below:

a) The authority of the Receiving State which is responsible for taking delivery of and examining the request for compensation shall upon receipt of the request conduct its own investigations without delay.

b) The authority of the Receiving State shall notify the authority of the Sending State of the receipt of the request for compensation as soon as possible, within four weeks of receipt of the request at the latest. The notification shall contain the reference number assigned by the authority of the Receiving State, the claimant’s name and address, a brief description of the incident and when and where it occurred, the amount of compensation demanded, the nature of the damage, the names of the members of the Armed Forces and the designation of the unit involved in the incident, as applicable. The notification shall be in duplicate.

c) The authority of the Sending State shall acknowledge receipt of the notification and send the authority of the Receiving State within six weeks of its receipt all available information and evidence. Where such information and evidence is unavailable to the authority of the Sending State, it shall inform the authority of the Receiving State to that effect. The authority of the Sending State shall further inform the authority of the Receiving State whether in its opinion the damage has been caused by acts or omissions for which the Armed Forces of the Sending State are legally responsible, and/or in connection with the use of a vehicle of the force, and whether that use was authorised or unauthorised.

d) Once it has analysed all available information and evidence, the authority of the Receiving State shall decide whether and in what amount the claim is justified under the law of the Receiving State.

e) The authority of the Receiving State shall pay the amount of compensation in its currency. It shall request the authority of the Sending State to reimburse the amount chargeable to the Sending State under Article VIII paragraph 5 sub-paragraph e of the NATO SOFA. The authority of the Sending State shall reimburse the amount due within three months. If, under the law of the Receiving State, compensation is granted in the form of a pension, the competent authorities of both States may agree on the payment of a capitalised amount in accordance with the provisions applicable in the Receiving State.

f) In the case of damage not caused in the performance of official duty, the authority of the Receiving State shall prepare a report for the authorities of the Sending State which shall examine it without delay and decide whether they shall offer compensation or ex gratia payment in settlement of the claim and if so of what amount. The authority of the Receiving State may offer the claimant - notwithstanding the decision of the Sending State - an ex gratia payment in settlement of his claim. If that offer is accepted by the claimant in full satisfaction of his claim, the authority of the Receiving State shall make the payment. The authority of the Sending State shall reimburse the authorities of the Receiving State for this sum. The provisions of sub-paragraphs a to d above shall continue to apply.

Article 12

Exercises

(1) Exercises shall be governed by the legal provisions of the Receiving State and the service regulations of its Armed Forces.

(2) Exercises on land shall as a general rule take place at military training areas, firing ranges and other military training facilities.

(3) Exercises conducted in the airspace shall be governed by the Receiving State’s regulations on the entry into and use of its airspace and the utilisation of aviation installations and facilities as well as applicable notification, approval and coordination procedures contained in the relevant regulations of the Receiving State. The regulations of the respective Receiving State involve the German Air Traffic Act and the Hungarian Air Traffic Act, as amended, and applicable German and Hungarian regulations and administrative arrangements of the civilian and military sector. Aircrew members participating in an exercise as well as the air traffic services and air defence control personnel involved in such an exercise must have a good command of the English language, insofar as this is necessary for reasons of flight safety or air traffic control.

(4) Exercises of naval and auxiliary vessels in coastal and internal waters shall be governed by the regulations of the Receiving State.

(5) Prior to the conduct of training exercises, the competent authorities of the Parties shall specify in detail the services to be provided and the costs involved.

Article 13

Settlement of Disputes

Any dispute concerning the application or interpretation of the present Agreement that does not extend to the interpretation or application of the NATO SOFA shall be settled amicably by consultation and shall not be referred to a third party for settlement.

Article 14

Implementation

Arrangements concerning the implementation of the present Agreement may be established between the competent ministries of the Parties’ States.

Article 15

Entry into Force, Amendment and Termination

(1) This Agreement shall enter into force one month from the date on which the Parties have notified each other that the national requirements for such entry into force have been fulfilled. The period of notice shall commence on the date of receipt of the last notification.

(2) This Agreement may be amended or supplemented at any time in writing with the mutual consent of the Parties. The amendments and supplements shall enter into force in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article and shall form the inseparable part of this Agreement.

(3) The present Agreement shall remain in force for an unlimited period. The Agreement may be terminated by either Party giving written notice thereof through diplomatic channels. Termination shall take effect one year after receipt of that notice.

Done at Budapest, on 27 February, 2014 in duplicate, each in the Hungarian, German and English languages, each text being authentic. In case of any divergent interpretation of the Hungarian and the German texts, the English text shall prevail.

For the Government of Hungary

For the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany

(signatures)

Megállapodás Magyarország Kormánya és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság Kormánya között Magyarország fegyveres erői és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság fegyveres erői tagjainak a másik állam területén történő ideiglenes tartózkodásáról (Magyar-német katonai jogállási megállapodás)

Magyarország Kormánya

és

a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság Kormánya

(a továbbiakban együttesen: „Felek”),

tekintettel az Észak-atlanti Szerződés részes államai között, fegyveres erőik jogállásáról 1951. június 19-én Londonban létrejött megállapodásra (a továbbiakban: NATO SOFA),

attól az óhajtól vezérelve, hogy megteremtsék Magyarország fegyveres ereje tagjainak a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság fegyveres ereje tagjainak Magyarország területén történő ideiglenes tartózkodásainak kiegészítő szabályait,

tekintettel arra, hogy jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései nem érintik a Felek nemzetközi törvényszékeket létrehozó nemzetközi megállapodásokból, beleértve a Nemzetközi Büntetőbíróság Római Statútumát is, eredő jogait és kötelezettségeit,

az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

1. cikk

Értelmező rendelkezések

(1) A Felek megállapodnak, hogy jelen Megállapodás tekintetében a NATO SOFA I. cikk (1) bekezdésében szereplő fogalmakat és meghatározásokat alkalmazzák.

(2) A „fegyveres erők tagjai” kifejezés alatt a Felek fegyveres erői személyi állományának katona és polgári jogállású tagjait kell érteni.

2. cikk

A Megállapodás tárgya

(1) Jelen Megállapodás tárgya kiterjed a Magyar Honvédség és a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság Fegyveres Ereje (Bundeswehr) (a továbbiakban együttesen: „Fegyveres Erők”) tagjainak a másik állam területére történő beutazására, az onnan történő kiutazására és ideiglenes tartózkodására.

(2) Jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései nem érintik a NATO SOFA rendelkezéseit.

3. cikk

A tartózkodások fajtája, célja és időtartama

(1) A Fegyveres Erők tagjainak jelen Megállapodás szerinti ideiglenes tartózkodásai gyakorlatok, katonai szervezetek kiképzéseinek, valamint szárazföldi áthaladásainak, továbbá a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságainak felelősségi körében végrehajtandó humanitárius segítségnyújtási tevékenységeknek és kutató-mentő műveleteknek a végrehajtását szolgálják, amely tevékenységekben a Küldő Állam fegyveres erőinek legfeljebb háromezer (3000) tagja vesz részt, általános szabályként harminc (30) napot nem meghaladó időtartamban.

(2) A Fegyveres Erők egyéni összekötői és tanácsadói beosztásokban szolgáló, valamint képzésben résztvevő egyes tagjai vonatkozásában legfeljebb két (2) év, meghosszabbítható időtartamú tartózkodásban is meg lehet állapodni.

(3) A felsorolt tartózkodások fajtájának, céljának és időtartamának részleteit a Felek illetékes hatóságai egyeztetik.

4. cikk

A be- és kiutazás és a tartózkodás szabályai

(1) A NATO SOFA III. cikkének rendelkezéseit nem érintve, a Küldő Állam fegyveres erői tagjainak jelen Megállapodás szerinti be- és kiutazásának és ideiglenes tartózkodásának engedélyezése tekintetében a Fogadó Állam nemzeti jogszabályait kell alkalmazni.

(2) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erői által a Fogadó Államba behozott vagy ott szállított fegyverekre az alábbi rendelkezések vonatkoznak:

a) A Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság illetékes hatóságai Magyarország illetékes hatóságaival konzultálva meghatározzák a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaságba behozható vagy annak területén szállítható háborús és egyéb fegyverek mennyiségét és típusait, valamint az e fegyverekre érvényes nyilvántartási, illetve bejelentési követelményeket. A Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság háborús fegyverek ellenőrzéséről szóló törvényei rendelkezéseinek értelmében szükséges, valamint a külkereskedelmi engedélyeket megadottnak kell tekinteni Magyarország fegyveres erői tagjai által behozatalra vagy szállításra kerülő valamennyi háborús fegyver vonatkozásában [a háborús fegyverek ellenőrzéséről szóló törvény 1 § (1) bekezdéséhez tartozó melléklet - Háborús Fegyverek Jegyzéke B része szerint], amennyiben e fegyverek nem gyalogsági taposóaknák vagy kazettás lőszerek. Magyarország fegyveres erői nem szállíthatnak be a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság területére vagy nem szállíthatnak a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság területén nukleáris, biológiai és vegyi fegyvereket (Háborús Fegyverek Jegyzéke A rész), valamint gyalogsági taposóaknákat és kazettás lőszereket.

b) Magyarország illetékes hatóságai a jelen Megállapodás keretében a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság fegyveres erői által Magyarország területére behozott, beszállított vagy Magyarország területén szállított fegyverek vonatkozásában nem követelhetnek engedélyeket vagy jóváhagyásokat. Magyarország illetékes hatóságai a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság illetékes hatóságaival konzultálva meghatározhatják e fegyverek mennyiségét és típusait, valamint az e fegyverekre érvényes nyilvántartási, illetve bejelentési követelményeket. A Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság fegyveres erői vagy az annak nevében eljáró személyek nem jogosultak Magyarország területére nukleáris, biológiai és vegyi fegyvereket, valamint gyalogsági taposóaknákat és kazettás lőszereket behozni, beszállítani vagy Magyarország területén szállítani.

5. cikk

Közrend és közbiztonság

Amennyiben a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének valamely tagja veszélyezteti a Fogadó Állam közbiztonságát vagy közrendjét, úgy a Fogadó Állam jogosult az érintett személynek a Fogadó Állam területéről való haladéktalan távozását kérni. A Küldő Állam hatóságai a távozásra vonatkozó igényeknek harminc (30) napon belül eleget tesznek.

6. cikk

Közegészségügy

(1) A Küldő Állam vállalja a nemzetközi és a Fogadó Államban alkalmazandó nemzeti egészségügyi szabályok tiszteletben tartását. A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjaitól a Fogadó Állam területére ideiglenes tartózkodás céljából való belépésükkor megkövetelhetik a Küldő Állam hatóságai által kiállított, a fertőző betegségektől való mentességet igazoló hivatalos egészségügyi tanúsítvány bemutatását. A Fogadó Állam illetékes katonai hatóságai legalább harminc (30) nappal a belépés tervezett időpontját megelőzően értesítik az igazolási kötelezettséggel kapcsolatos valamennyi követelményről a Küldő Állam illetékes katonai hatóságait.

(2) A Felek illetékes katonai hatóságai biztosítják az (1) bekezdés tárgyát érintő információcsere kölcsönös elősegítését.

(3) A Fogadó Állam területén az emberek, állatok és növények hordozta fertőző betegségek megelőzése és a növényeket valamint a növényi eredetű termékeket veszélyeztető organizmusok kezelése tekintetében a Fogadó Állam megfelelő nemzeti jogszabályait kell alkalmazni. A Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai a járvány megelőzési, fertőző járvány kezelési és élelmiszerügyi jogszabályaik keretében teendő intézkedéseiket, a növényekre és növényi eredetű és egyéb termékekre vonatkozó növény egészségügyi intézkedéseiket, valamit gyógyszerekkel, gyógyászati eszközökkel és közegészségügyi ellenőrzéssel kapcsolatos jogszabályaik keretében teendő intézkedéseiket a nemzetközi szerződésekben vállalt köztelezettségeikkel összhangban hozzák meg.

7. cikk

Büntető joghatóság és kényszerítő intézkedések

(1) Azon esetekben, amikor a NATO SOFA VII. cikk (3) bekezdés b) pontja szerint a Fogadó Állam elsődleges joga a büntető joghatóság gyakorlása a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai felett, a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai lemondanak e joguk gyakorlásáról, kivéve ha a Fogadó Állam alapvető igazságszolgáltatási érdekei a büntető joghatóság gyakorlását szükségessé teszik.

(2) Az alapvető igazságszolgáltatási érdekek különösen az alábbi esetekben tehetik a büntető joghatóság gyakorlását szükségessé:

a) a Fogadó Állam biztonságát veszélyeztető jelentős súlyú bűncselekmények,

b) halált okozó, a testi épség és a nemi élet szabadsága elleni súlyos bűncselekmények.

Az a) és b) pontban felsorolt bűncselekmények tekintetében a büntetőjogi felelősséget a Fogadó Állam joga szabályozza.

(3) A büntető joghatóság gyakorlásáról való lemondás esetén, a Fogadó Állam kérelmére, a Küldő Állam a terheltet haladéktalanul eltávolítja a Fogadó Állam területéről. A büntető joghatóság gyakorlásáról való lemondást követően a (korábbi) Fogadó Állam meghatározott egyedi esetekben tájékoztatást kérhet a Küldő Államba visszatért terhelttel szembeni büntetőeljárásról.

(4) A Felek államainak illetékes bíróságai és hatóságai a vonatkozó nemzeti jogszabályaik és a nemzetközi szerződésekben vállalt kötelezettségeik keretein belül kölcsönösen jogsegélyt nyújtanak egymásnak a büntető eljárások támogatása érdekében. Amennyiben a Fogadó Állam nem mond le a büntető joghatóság gyakorlásáról, a Küldő Állam a nemzeti jogrendszere által lehetővé tett mértékig mindent megtesz, hogy a fegyveres erejének azon tagjait, akiket a Fogadó Állam területén való tartózkodásuk idején elkövetett bűncselekménnyel gyanúsítanak, rábírja a Fogadó Állam bíróságai és hatóságai előtti megjelenésre, amennyiben őket erre a Fogadó Állam joga kötelezi. Amennyiben a terhelt a Küldő Államba visszatért, és a (3) bekezdés rendelkezései nem alkalmazandóak, a Fogadó Állam kérelmére a Küldő Állam az ügyet a Küldő Állam illetékes hatóságai elé terjeszti a büntetőeljárás megindításával kapcsolatos döntés meghozatala érdekében.

(5) A Fogadó Állam bíróságai és illetékes hatóságai joghatóságuk és illetékességük keretei között a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjaival szemben a Fogadó Állam területén való tartózkodásuk idején kényszerítő intézkedéseket rendelhetnek el és hajthatnak végre.

(6) Ha a Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje tagját a Fogadó Állam hatóságai őrizetbe vették vagy vele szemben személyi szabadságot korlátozó egyéb kényszerítő intézkedést hoztak, a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatósága haladéktalanul értesíti a Küldő Államnak a Fogadó Államban működő diplomáciai képviseletét. Az értesítés tartalmazza, hogy az ügyben a további eljárásra mely bíróság vagy hatóság illetékes.

(7) A Küldő Állam bíróságai és hatóságai büntető joghatóságukat a Fogadó Államban nem gyakorolhatják.

(8) Amennyiben a Fogadó Államban a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjával szemben a Fogadó Államban folyamatban lévő büntetőeljárás során szükségessé válik annak megállapítása, hogy valamely cselekményt vagy mulasztást szolgálati feladat végrehajtása során követtek-e el, úgy ennek megállapítása során a Küldő Állam jogával összhangban kell eljárni. Erről a Fogadó Állam kérelmére a Küldő Állam által kijelölt hatóság a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságaihoz történő benyújtás céljából igazolást állíthat ki, amelyet azok a nemzeti jogszabályaiknak megfelelően vesznek figyelembe.

8. cikk

Távközlés

(1) A Fogadó Államban biztosított nyilvános távközlési szolgáltatások használatára egyaránt vonatkoznak a Fogadó Állam általános szabályai és a szolgáltató megfelelő általános szerződési feltételei is. E rendelkezés hatálya különösképpen a díjak kiszámításának, elszámolásának és megtérítésének módjaira terjed ki.

(2) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai, amennyiben ezt a tartózkodásuk céljának elérése szükségessé teszi, a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságainak engedélyével, ideiglenes jelleggel távközlési létesítményeket, beleértve a rádió rendszereket is, telepíthetnek és üzemeltethetnek.

(3) A Fogadó Állam területén a Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje által üzemeltetendő vagy a nyilvános távközlő hálózat kapcsolati vagy átviteli vonalaihoz csatlakoztatandó rádió rendszereinek és távközlő végberendezéseknek meg kell felelniük a Fogadó Állam jogszabályai szerint, a rádió rendszerekre és távközlő végberendezésekre általánosan vonatkozó alapvető műszaki követelményeknek. A követelményeknek való megfelelést megfelelőségi értékelési eljárás során kell tanúsítani, és a megfelelőségi jelöléseket az eszközökön el kell helyezni.

(4) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai a Fogadó Államban való tartózkodásuk idején kizárólag a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai által részükre kijelölt rádiófrekvenciákat használhatják, kivéve, ha az eszközök az egyéni engedélyhez nem kötött frekvenciákon működnek. A rádiófrekvenciák kijelöléséhez szükséges kérelmet legkésőbb negyvenkét (42) nappal az üzemeltetés megkezdésének tervezett időpontja előtt kell benyújtani. A tartózkodás befejezésekor a rádiófrekvenciákat vissza kell adni a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságainak.

(5) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai minden szükséges intézkedést megtesznek annak érdekében, hogy a Fogadó Állam távközlő rendszereinek az ő távközlő vagy egyéb elektronikus berendezéseik általi zavarását elkerüljék. Amennyiben a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének rádióállomásai károsan zavarják a Fogadó Állam területén kívüli rádióállomásokat, illetve azok általi zavarásnak vannak kitéve, úgy a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai a Nemzetközi Távközlési Egyesület egységes szerkezetbe foglalt Alapokmánya és Egyezménye és Rádiószabályzata szerint járnak el. A Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai a hatályos rendelkezések biztosította hatáskörük mértékéig megtesznek minden szükséges intézkedést a Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje távközlő berendezéseinek a Fogadó Állam távközlő vagy egyéb elektronikai eszközei általi zavarásának elkerülése érdekében. Elektromágneses interferencia esetén az eszközök elektromágneses kompatibilitására vonatkozó nemzeti szabályokat kell alkalmazni. Amennyiben ennek eredményeként a zavarás forrását üzemen kívül kell helyezni, úgy a Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje ezt haladéktalanul végrehajtja.

9. cikk

Környezetvédelem

(1) A Felek elismerik és elfogadják a környezetvédelem jelentőségét a fegyveres erőik tagjai által a másik állam területén végrehajtott tevékenységeik során. A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai kötelesek betartani a Fogadó Állam környezetvédelmi jogszabályait.

(2) A Felek illetékes hatóságai szorosan együttműködnek a környezetvédelmi ügyekben, különösen a gyakorlatok előkészítése során.

(3) A Fogadó Állam jogszabályi előírásain túlmenően is el kell kerülni a környezet károsítását, illetve ahol a környezet károsítása nem elkerülhető a károsítás kiegyenlítése érdekében megfelelő környezetvédelmi intézkedéseket kell foganatosítani.

(4) A fegyverzeti eszközök, nehéz technikai eszközök és veszélyes anyagok szállítását elsődlegesen vasúton és vízi úton kell biztosítani. A védelmi minisztériumok a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságaival egyeztetve megállapodnak a szállítási útvonalakban és eszközökben.

(5) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai légijárműveiket, vízi járműveiket és gépjárműveiket a Fogadó Államban kizárólag a Fogadó Állam szabályozói szerinti alacsony szennyezőanyag kibocsátású üzem- és kenőanyagokkal, valamint adalékokkal üzemeltetik, amennyiben ezek megfelelnek a légijárműveikre, vízi járműveikre és gépjárműveikre vonatkozó műszaki követelményeknek. A személy- és haszonjárművek alkalmazása során be kell tartani a Fogadó Állam zajártalom és kipufogógáz kibocsátás korlátozására vonatkozó jogszabályait, amennyiben azok betartása nem jelent indokolatlan terhet.

(6) A kiképzési létesítmények igénybe vétele során a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai kötelesek betartani az igénybe vételi, különösen a biztonsági, tűzvédelmi és környezetvédelmi rendszabályokat. A Fogadó állam fegyveres erejének adminisztratív rendelkezései tekintetében ugyanez vonatkozik a gyakorlatokra is. A Felek védelmi minisztériumai saját hatáskörükben eljárva, külön adminisztratív szabályokban állapodnak meg az éjszakai, szombati, vasárnapi és ünnepnapi lövészetekre vonatkozóan.

(7) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai a Fogadó Állam hulladékok környezetbarát újrahasznosítására vagy egyéb kezelésére vonatkozó jogszabályai szerint járnak el. A fel nem használt lőszerek robbantással vagy égetéssel történő megsemmisítése a nem erre kijelölt létesítmények területén nem engedélyezett.

10. cikk

A Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje gépjárműveinek üzemeltetése és a Fogadó Állam repülőtereinek igénybe vétele

(1) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének gépjárműveit és vontatmányait a Küldő Állam illetékes hatósága a közúti forgalomban való részvétel céljából nyilvántartásba veszi és engedélyezi.

(2) A Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje tagjainak a Fogadó Állam hatályos nemzeti jogszabályai, a Felek között létrejött vonatkozó nemzetközi megállapodások, beleértve a megfelelő technikai megállapodások és eljárási szabályok, valamint az Európai Unió jogszabályai szerint végrehajtott szállításait és mozgásait engedélyezettnek kell tekinteni. Amennyiben a katonai szállítások és mozgások végrehajtásához a veszélyes anyagok szállítása miatti külön vagy rendkívüli jóváhagyások és engedélyek megadása szükséges, úgy ezek kiadását a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai végzik. A Küldő Állam illetékes hatóságai megfelelő időben tájékoztatják a Fogadó Állam katonai hatóságait a mozgások és szállítások technikai részleteiről.

(3) A Fogadó Állam katonai hatóságai koordinálják a Küldő Állam katonai érdekeinek képviseletét a szállítások megszervezése során a polgári hatóságok és vállalkozások irányában.

(4) A Küldő Állam saját, a fegyveres erői tagjainak és hadfelszerelésének szállításához szükséges teher- és személyszállító vasúti kocsijainak nyilvántartása, továbbá a Fogadó Állam vasúti infrastruktúrájának igénybe vételét szabályozó és arra vonatkozó biztonsági előírások tekintetében az Európai Unió jogi aktusait és azok Fogadó Állam nemzeti jogába átültetett rendelkezéseit, valamint a Nemzetközi Vasúti Fuvarozási Egyezmény (COTIF) rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni. Amennyiben fennáll a Fogadó Államnak a Küldő Állam vasúti járműveinek minőségi állapotára és alkalmazására vonatkozó jogszabályaitól való eltérés szándéka, úgy a Küldő Állam vasúttársasága a szükséges engedélyek kiadását a Fogadó Állam közlekedési hatóságainál kérelmezi.

(5) A Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai betartják a Fogadó Állam közlekedési szabályait, beleértve a balesti helyszínen való magatartást és a veszélyes anyagok szállítását szabályozó rendelkezéseket is. A Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságai felügyelik az előzőekben felsorolt szabályok betartását. A Küldő Állam illetékes hatóságai segítséget nyújtanak e felügyelet végrehajtásához. A Küldő Állam figyelembe veszi a Fogadó Állam közlekedésbiztonsági szabályait. Az e szabályok által lehetővé tett keretek között a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai alkalmazhatják a gépjárművek, vontatmányok, belvízi vízi járművek és légijárművek tervezésére, gyártására, kialakítására és felszerelésére vonatkozó nemzeti szabványaikat. A Felek hatóságai szoros egyeztetést folytatnak az előzőekben felsorolt rendelkezések alkalmazásának tárgyában.

(6) A Fogadó Állam közúti közlekedési jogszabályaiban rögzített méretekre, tengelyterhelésre, össztömegre vagy mennyiségre vonatkozó korlátozásokon túllépő gépjárművek és vontatmányok üzemeltetése, a szükséghelyzeteket kivéve, a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatóságainak engedélyével történhet. Általános rendelkezésként a lánctalpas járművek a gyakorlóterek területén kívül kizárólag vasúton vagy szükség esetén nyitott tréleren mozgathatóak. Gumibetétes lánctalppal nem rendelkező lánctalpas járművekkel közúton tilos közlekedni.

(7) A szükséghelyzeteket kivéve a Küldő Államban ilyenként bejegyzett katonai légijárművekkel a Fogadó Állam polgári vagy polgári és katonai rendeltetésű repülőtereinek a Küldő Állam fegyveres erejének tagjai általi igénybe vételére kizárólag a Fogadó Állam illetékes hatósága által, a Fogadó Állam hatályos jogszabályaival összhangban kiadott engedéllyel kerülhet sor.

(8) A Felek illetékes hatóságai koordinálják az általuk telepített és üzemeltetett repülésirányítási és a kapcsolódó híradó rendszereket a légiközlekedés biztonságának szavatolásához és a fegyveres erőik tagjai tartózkodásának céljai eléréséhez szükséges mértékben.

11. cikk

Kárigények rendezése

(1) A Felek kölcsönösen tájékoztatják egymást a kárigények rendezésében illetékes hatóságaikról. E hatóságok a jóhiszeműség elve alapján együttműködnek. A hatóságok minden lehetséges segítséget megadnak egymásnak annak érdekében, hogy biztosítsák a Fogadó Állam bíróságai és hatóságai által a fegyveres erők személyi állományának katona és polgári jogállású tagjai polgári jogi kötelezettségeivel kapcsolatosan hozott ítéletek és közigazgatási határozatok teljesítését.

(2) Harmadik fél kárigényének rendezésére a NATO SOFA VIII. cikk (5)-(7) bekezdések rendelkezésein túl, a VIII. cikk (6) bekezdés a)-c) pontjaiban meghatározott, és jelen bekezdés f) pontjában foglaltakkal kiegészített eljárásban, az alábbi rendelkezéseket kell alkalmazni:

a) A Fogadó Állam kártérítési igény átvételére és kivizsgálására jogosult hatósága a kártérítési igény kézhezvételét követően haladéktalanul megkezdi saját vizsgálatát.

b) A Fogadó Állam hatósága a lehető leghamarabb, de legkésőbb a kártérítési igény kézhezvételét követő négy héten belül értesíti a Küldő Állam hatóságát a kártérítési igény kézhezvételéről. Az értesítés szükség szerint tartalmazza a Fogadó Állam hatósága által adott nyilvántartási számot, a kárigényt bejelentő nevét és címét, az esemény rövid leírását, bekövetkezésének helyét és időpontját, az igényelt kártérítés összegét, a kár jellegét, valamint a fegyveres erők káreseményben érintett tagjainak nevét és az alegység megnevezését. Az értesítést két példányban kell kiállítani.

c) A Küldő Állam hatósága visszaigazolja az értesítés beérkezését, és a kézhezvételt követő hat héten belül megküldi a Fogadó Állam hatóságának az összes rendelkezésre álló információt és bizonyítékot. Amennyiben ezek az információk és bizonyítékok nem állnak rendelkezésre, úgy erről a tényről a Küldő Állam hatósága értesíti a Fogadó Állam hatóságát. A Küldő Állam hatósága továbbá tájékoztatja a Fogadó Állam hatóságát, hogy a megítélése szerint a kárt olyan tevékenység vagy mulasztás okozta, amely tekintetében a Küldő Állam fegyveres ereje jogilag felelős, vagy a fegyveres erők gépjárműveinek igénybevételével kapcsolatosan következett-e be a káresemény, illetve hogy jogszerű vagy jogszerűtlen volt-e a gépjármű igénybe vétele.

d) A rendelkezésre álló összes információ és bizonyíték elemzését követően a Fogadó Állam hatósága a Fogadó Állam jogszabályai szerint dönt a kárigény jogszerűségéről, illetve annak jogos mértékéről.

e) A Fogadó Állam hatósága nemzeti valutájában fizeti meg a kártérítés összegét. A Fogadó Állam a NATO SOFA VIII. cikk (5) bekezdés e) pontja szerint kéri a Küldő Állam hatóságától a Küldő Államot terhelő összeg megtérítését. A Küldő Állam hatósága az összeg megtérítését három hónapon belül teljesíti. Amennyiben a Fogadó Állam jogszabályai szerint a kártérítés járadék formájában fizetendő, úgy a két Állam illetékes hatóságai megállapodhatnak egy tőkésített összeg kifizetéséről a Fogadó Államban alkalmazandó rendelkezések szerint.

f) A nem szolgálati feladat végrehajtása során okozott kár esetén a Fogadó Állam hatósága jelentést készít a Küldő Állam hatóságának, amelyik haladéktalanul megvizsgálja azt, és dönt az esetleges kártérítés felajánlásáról vagy a kárigénynek a kárfelelősség elismerésével nem járó (ex gratia) juttatással való rendezéséről, illetve kedvező döntés esetén annak mértékéről. A Fogadó Fél hatósága, a Küldő Állam döntésétől függetlenül, a károsultaknak a kárrendezés érdekében ex gratia juttatást ajánlhat fel. Amennyiben a károsult a felajánlást kárigényének maradéktalan rendezéseként elfogadja, a Fogadó Állam hatósága teljesíti a kifizetést. A Küldő Állam hatósága az így kifizetett összeget megtéríti a Fogadó Állam hatóságának. A jelen cikk a)-d) pontjainak rendelkezéseit továbbra is alkalmazni kell.

12. cikk

Gyakorlatok

(1) A gyakorlatokat a Fogadó Állam jogszabályai és fegyveres erejének szolgálati szabályzatai szerint kell végrehajtani.

(2) Általános szabályként a szárazföldi gyakorlatokat katonai gyakorlótereken, lőtereken és egyéb katonai kiképzési létesítményekben kell végrehajtani.

(3) A légtérben a gyakorlatokat a Fogadó Államnak a légterébe való berepülést, légterének használatát, a repülési létesítményeinek igénybe vételét szabályozó előírásai, valamint a Fogadó Állam vonatkozó szabályaiban meghatározott értesítési, engedélyezési és koordinációs eljárások szerint kell végrehajtani. A mindenkori Fogadó Állam szabályozói magukban foglalják a hatályos magyar és a német légiközlekedési törvényt, valamint az alkalmazandó magyar és német polgári és katonai szabályzatokat és közigazgatási rendelkezéseket. A gyakorlatot végrehajtó hajózó személyzetnek, valamint a gyakorlatban résztvevő légiforgalmi és légvédelmi irányító szolgálat állományának a repülésbiztonsági és repülésirányítási követelményeknek megfelelő angol nyelvismerettel kell rendelkezniük.

(4) Hadihajókkal és katonai úszólétesítményekkel a parti tengereken és belföldi víziutakon a Fogadó Állam jogszabályai szerint kell végrehajtani a gyakorlatokat.

(5) A gyakorlatok végrehajtása előtt a Felek illetékes hatóságai részletesen meghatározzák a biztosítandó szolgáltatásokat és keletkező költségeket.

13. cikk

Viták rendezése

Jelen Megállapodás alkalmazásából és értelmezéséből eredő, a NATO SOFA alkalmazására és értelmezésére ki nem terjedő vitákat a Felek békés úton, konzultációk útján, harmadik fél bevonása nélkül rendezik.

14. cikk

Végrehajtási rendelkezések

Jelen Megállapodás végrehajtásával kapcsolatos rendelkezésekben a Felek államainak illetékes minisztériumai állapodhatnak meg.

15. cikk

Hatálybalépés, módosítás és megszűnés

(1) Jelen Megállapodás attól a naptól számított egy hónap múlva lép hatályba, amelyen a Felek kölcsönösen tájékoztatják egymást a hatálybalépéshez szükséges belső jogi követelmények teljesüléséről. Ezen értesítési időszak az utolsó értesítés kézhezvételének időpontjával kezdődik.

(2) Jelen Megállapodás a Felek kölcsönös egyetértésével írásban bármikor módosítható vagy kiegészíthető. A módosítások és kiegészítések jelen cikk (1) bekezdésének rendelkezései szerint lépnek hatályba, és ezek jelen Megállapodás elválaszthatatlan részét képezik.

(3) Jelen Megállapodás határozatlan időre jön létre. Jelen Megállapodást bármelyik Fél diplomáciai úton tett írásbeli nyilatkozatával felmondhatja. A felmondás a nyilatkozat kézhezvételétől számított egy év elteltével lép hatályba.

Készült Budapesten, 2014. február 27-én két eredeti példányban, mindkettő magyar, német és angol nyelven, valamennyi szöveg egyaránt hiteles. A magyar és a német nyelvű szövegek eltérő értelmezése esetén az angol nyelvű változat az irányadó.

Magyarország Kormánya nevében

a Németországi Szövetségi Köztársaság Kormánya nevében

(aláírások)”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és a 3. § a Megállapodás 15. Cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Megállapodás, valamint a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter annak ismertté válását követően, a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a honvédelemért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.