2013. évi CXCVII. törvény

a Magyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya között a katasztrófák esetén történő együttműködésről és kölcsönös segítségnyújtásról szóló Egyezmény kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya között a katasztrófák esetén történő együttműködésről és kölcsönös segítségnyújtásról szóló Egyezmény (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés az Egyezményt e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § Az Egyezmény hiteles angol és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF HUNGARY AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SERBIA ON THE COOPERATION AND MUTUAL ASSISTANCE IN THE EVENT OF DISASTERS

The Government of Hungary and the Government of the Republic of Serbia (hereinafter referred to as the Contracting Parties)

- Desiring to contribute to strengthening and deepening the friendly relations between the two countries,

- Convinced that the prevention of natural and man-made disasters and the cooperation for the sake of granting mutual assistance to each other in disasters are the joint interest of the Contracting Parties.

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Forms of cooperation

(1) Under this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall cooperate in the prevention of natural and man-made disasters in accordance with their effective national legislations, and granting mutual assistance to each other in disasters.

(2) The cooperation of the Contracting Parties determined in paragraph (1) of Article 1 shall include the following:

- Granting mutual assistance, rendering equipment available to the Contracting Party requesting assistance in order to prevent and manage disasters;

- Exchange of information on sources of hazards that may generate disasters and on their consequences, particularly in the cases when these may affect the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party;

- Determining causes of the disasters and assessment of their consequences.

- Organizing and conducting joint exercises;

- Exchange of experience on forecasting, preventing and assessing disasters, and sharing scientific, technical and practical lessons learnt;

- Arranging conferences, study trips, scientific programs and professional courses, cooperation between the Competent Authorities and interested institutions of the Contracting Parties.

Article 2

Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement the terms are defined as follows:

a) „Contracting Party requesting assistance” means the Contracting Party, whose competent authority requests provision of assistance from the other Contracting Party,

b) „Contracting Party providing assistance” means the Contracting Party, whose competent authority accepted the request for provision of assistance to the other Contracting Party,

c) „Transit state” means the Contracting Party, through the territory of which the rescue teams, individual experts, as well as the equipment and objects of assistance, shall transit, for the purpose of provision of assistance to Third Party,

d) „Disaster” is a natural or other hazard or event that by its scope, intensity or unexpectedness endangers health and life of large number of people, material goods and environment, and whose continuance cannot be prevented or removed by daily activities of competent services, state administration authorities and self-government units, with the exception of state of war, as well as accidents occurred by acts of terrorism,

e) „Rescue team” means a group of trained persons with adequate equipment and means, determined by the Contracting Party providing assistance to provide assistance,

f) „Individual expert” means person with adequate equipment and means, who carries out specialized activities in providing the assistance independently, in groups or in cooperation with the rescue team he or she can be integrated into,

g) „Equipment” refers to means, means of transport, as well as materials and objects for personal and common use by the members of the rescue teams and individual experts,

h) „Objects of assistance” means food, drinking water, medicines and medical equipment and other means designated to be distributed free of charge to endangered population or victims of a disaster in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance with an aim to reduce the effects of the disaster.

i) „Personal data” means information of any kind concerning any identified or identifiable natural person. For the purposes of this Agreement, these shall include the surname and any given names, date of birth, address and data pertaining to vocation, qualifications, place of work and, when needed, health condition.

Article 3

Competent authorities

(1) Contracting Parties ascertain ministries competent for the implementation of this Agreement and for maintenance of direct contact in the fields of cooperation determined in Article 1 hereof, competent authorities are the following:

- For the Hungarian Contracting Party: Ministry of Interior, National Directorate General for Disaster Management;

- For the Serbian Contracting Party: Ministry of Interior, Sector for Emergency Management.

(2) To this end, the Contracting Parties shall mutually notify each another on the changes of the data on the competent authorities, persons and organizations designated as contact points.

Article 4

Subjects of cooperation

The Contracting Parties shall facilitate and encourage all forms of mutual cooperation between their competent authorities, governmental, and non-governmental organizations in order to achieve the objectives of this Agreement.

Article 5

Reimbursement of assistance provision costs

Unless the Contracting Parties otherwise agree by mutual consent, the cooperation and the granting of assistance under Article 1 hereof shall be free of charge.

Article 6

Crossing the state border and stay on the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance

(1) Competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall agree on the time and place of crossing the state border, the manner of arrival and departure and the period of stay of rescue teams and individual experts in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance.

(2) Members of rescue teams and individual experts may enter the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance or stay in that territory for the purpose of providing the assistance under the conditions provided for in the legal regulations in force in the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance.

(3) Members of rescue teams and individual experts shall be authorised to wear a uniform in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance if that uniform represents part of their usual equipment.

(4) The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article are also applicable in case when the state of one of the Contracting Parties is a transit state and the other of the Contracting Parties is a Contracting Party requesting or providing assistance. The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall, at the earliest opportunity, notify each other of the transit needed, establish procedures for its realization and, if necessary, provide transit escort to rescue teams and individual experts.

(5) During their stay in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance, national legislation applicable in that state shall apply on the members of rescue teams and individual experts.

Article 7

Import, export and transport of the equipment and objects of assistance across the state border

(1) Contracting Parties shall facilitate the import, export and transport of the equipment and objects of assistance across state borders of their respective States. At crossing the state border, the leader of the rescue team or individual expert shall in course of the presentation of goods submit to the competent customs authorities of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance the list of equipment and objects of assistance drawn up in the official language of the Contracting Party providing assistance and in English language.

(2) The import, export, transport, initiation of a custom procedure and the exemption from import duty of the equipment and objects of assistance shall be performed in accordance with the customs legislation and under the conditions and in the scope of authorisation applicable on the state of the territory of the respective Contracting Party.

(3) Rescue teams and individual experts may carry in the territory of the State of the Contracting Party requesting assistance only the equipment, objects of assistance and means for their own supply.

(4) In the case the equipment is not completely used at providing the assistance, it shall be carried back into the territory of the state of the Contracting Party providing assistance in accordance with the customs legislation in force. If the equipment is left as a humanitarian aid in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance, information on its type, quantity and location shall be notified to the competent authority of the Contracting Party requesting assistance, which shall subsequently inform the competent customs authority of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance.

(5) The Contracting Party requesting assistance shall enable decontamination of the equipment of the rescue teams and individual experts. If the decontamination is not possible, the equipment may be left in the territory the Contracting Party requesting assistance.

(6) Medications containing narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances may be ímported into the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance only for the purpose of provision of necessary medical assistance and may be used only under the supervision of qualified medical personnel in accordance with the national legislation of the state of the Contracting Party providing assistance. The leader of the rescue team shall submit to the competent customs authorities of the states of both Contracting Parties the list of medications containing narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances with quotation of their names and quantity. The Contracting Party providing assistance shall inform the Contracting Party requesting assistance on used medications containing narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Remaining medications containing narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances must be exported back into the territory of the state of the Contracting Party providing assistance under the customs supervision of the Contracting Party requesting assistance based upon the documents confirming their names and quantity. This exchange shall not be considered as import and export of goods under international agreements on narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances binding to the Contracting Parties.

(7) The authorisation for international road transport shall not be required for vehicles used by rescue teams and individual experts and for vehicles ensuring the transport of the equipment and objects of assistance.

(8) The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 7 of this Article shall also be applicable in the case when the state of any of the Contracting Party is a transit state and the other of the Contracting Parties is a Contracting Party requesting or providing assistance.

Article 8

Request for provision of assistance

(1) Provision of assistance occurs upon request of the Contracting Party requesting assistance, under the effective national legislation of the States of the Contracting Parties.

(2) The Contracting Party requesting assistance shall inform the Contracting Party providing assistance on the nature and extent of the disaster, on the occurred or expected disaster’s consequences and on the nature and form of the assistance requested.

(3) The Contracting Party providing assistance shall inform the other Contracting Party, without delay, on its reply and response capabilities.

Article 9

Provision of assistance

(1) The competent authority of the Contracting Party requesting assistance shall direct the operations in all cases.

(2) The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall agree on the utilization method of the equipment of the Contracting Party providing assistance.

(3) The competent authority of the Contracting Party requesting assistance may give instructions to the rescue teams of the Contracting Party providing assistance only through the rescue team leader.

Article 10

Use of aircraft and vessels

(1) Aircraft and vessels may be used for the transfer of rescue teams and individual experts, their equipment and objects of assistance and for performing the rescue operations in accordance with this Agreement.

(2) It is necessary to notify the use of aircraft or vessels to the competent authority of the Contracting Party requesting assistance, with introduction of data on the type and registration number of the aircrafts and of data on the type, name or mark, or registration number of the vessels, on the crew and cargo, as well as on the time, expected route and place of the aircraft landing or vessels anchoring, submission a flight plan for aircraft and in accordance with the national legislation of the states of the Contracting Parties.

(3) The provisions of this Agreement shall also be applied to the crew of the aircrafts and vessels.

(4) State aircraft may be used for the purposes of this Agreement only with the explicit consent of the Contracting Party requesting assistance.

Article 11

Information confidentiality

(1) Information collected during activities under this Agreement may only be transferred to a third party by the prior consent of the Contracting Parties and may only be made public in case of the prior written consent of the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties.

(2) In the event that the Competent Authorities of the Contracting Parties provide personal data to one another based on this Agreement, the provisions of the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (signed in Strasbourg on the 28th of January 1981) and its Additional Protocol (signed in Strasbourg on the 8th of November 2001) shall be applied.

Article 12

Settlement of dispute

Any dispute that may arise from the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall be settled by the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties through negotiations or, if needed, through diplomatic channels.

Article 13

Compensation for damage

(1) The Contracting Parties shall waive all claims for compensation for damage from the other Contracting Party in case of property or environmental damages caused by a member of the rescue team or an individual expert during provision of assistance in accordance with this Agreement, if the Contracting Parties do not agree otherwise.

(2) The Contracting Parties shall waive all claims for compensation for damage from the other Contracting Party in the case of bodily injury, permanent injuries or in the case of death of a member of rescue teams or an individual expert, which occurred during provision of assistance in accordance with this Agreement.

(3) If a member of the rescue team or an individual expert of the Contracting Party providing assistance causes a damage to a third person in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance related to provision of assistance in accordance with this Agreement, the Contracting Party requesting assistance shall be held responsible for such damage.

(4) The provisions of the paragraphs 1 to 3 of this Article shall not be applicable to the cases where damage was caused intentionally or due to gross negligence.

(5) The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 of this Article shall only be applied to the damages which occurred during implementation of this Agreement in the territory of the state of the Contracting Party requesting assistance.

(6) The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall closely cooperate in clarification of personal injuries, deaths or damages, which occurred in relation with provision of assistance in accordance with this Agreement. For that purpose, they shall exchange the necessary information.

(7) The provisions of this Article shall also be applicable in the case when the state of any of the Contracting Party is a transit state and the other of the Contracting Parties is a Contracting Party requesting or providing assistance.

Article 14

Relation of the Agreement to the other international Agreements

(1) The provisions of this Agreement shall not affect the commitments of the Contracting Parties envisaged by other bilateral or multilateral international agreements.

(2) This Agreement shall not affect the obligations which may arise from the membership of Hungary in the European Union, or the obligations of Hungary and the Republic of Serbia that may arise from their membership in international organizations.

Article 15

Entry into force

(1) This Agreement shall enter into force on the 30th day after the receipt of the last notification in which the Contracting Parties mutually inform each other on the completion of the internal legal procedures required for its entry into force.

(2) This Agreement shall be concluded for an indefinite period. Each Contracting Party may terminate this Agreement. The Agreement shall cease to be effective 3 months after the date of the receipt of the diplomatic note on termination by the other Contracting Party.

(3) The Contracting Parties may amend this Agreement by mutual consent. The amendment of this Agreement shall enter into force in accordance with the procedure referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.

Done at Bucharest, on the 17th day of October, 2013 year, in two original copies, in Hungarian, Serbian and English languages, all texts being equally authentic. In case of any dispute, the text in English language shall prevail.

(Signatures)

EGYEZMÉNY Magyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya között a katasztrófák esetén történő együttműködésről és kölcsönös segítségnyújtásról

Magyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya (a továbbiakban: Szerződő Felek)

- attól az óhajtól vezérelve, hogy hozzájáruljanak a két állam között fennálló baráti kapcsolatok erősítéséhez és szélesítéséhez;

- meggyőződve arról, hogy a természeti és az ember által előidézett katasztrófák megelőzése, valamint a katasztrófák esetén történő kölcsönös segítségnyújtás céljából történő együttműködés mindkét Szerződő Fél érdekében áll

az alábbiakban állapodnak meg:

1. cikk

Az együttműködés formái

(1) A jelen Egyezmény értelmében a Szerződő Felek, hatályos belső jogszabályaikkal összhangban együttműködnek a természeti és ember által előidézett katasztrófák megelőzésében és a katasztrófák esetén történő kölcsönös segítségnyújtásban.

(2) Az 1. cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott Szerződő Felek együttműködése az alábbiakra terjed ki:

- a katasztrófák megelőzése és kezelése érdekében történő kölcsönös segítségnyújtás, a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél részére technikai felszerelések rendelkezésre bocsátása;

- információcsere katasztrófát előidézhető kockázati forrásokról és azok következményeiről, különös tekintettel azokra az esetekre, amelyek hatással lehetnek a másik Szerződő Felek államának területére;

- a katasztrófák okainak megállapítása és a következmények értékelése;

- közös gyakorlatok szervezése és végrehajtása;

- tapasztalatcsere a katasztrófák előrejelzése, megelőzése, értékelése terén, valamint a tudományos, technikai és gyakorlati tapasztalatok megosztása;

- konferenciák, tanulmányutak, tudományos programok és szakmai tanfolyamok szervezése, együttműködés a Szerződő Felek illetékes Hatóságaival és érdekelt intézményeivel.

2. cikk

Fogalom-meghatározások

A jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában a fogalmak jelentése a következő:

a) „Segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél”: az a Szerződő Fél, amelynek illetékes hatósága segítség nyújtására kéri a másik Szerződő Felet;

b) „Segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél”: az a Szerződő Fél, amelynek illetékes hatósága elfogadta a másik Szerződő Fél segítségnyújtás iránti kérelmét;

c) „Tranzitország”: az a Szerződő Fél, amelynek területén segítségnyújtás céljából áthaladnak a mentőcsapatok, a szakértők, a felszerelés, valamint a segélyszállítmány Harmadik Fél részére;

d) „Katasztrófa”: olyan természeti vagy egyéb veszélyhelyzet vagy esemény, amely méreteinél, intenzitásánál vagy váratlanságánál fogva nagyszámú ember egészségét és életét, anyagi javakat és a környezetet veszélyezteti, és amelynek folytonossága nem szüntethető vagy gátolható meg az illetékes hatóságok, a közigazgatás vagy az önkormányzati szervek szokásos napi működésének keretében; kivéve a hadiállapotot és a terrorcselekmény által okozott baleseteket;

e) „Mentőcsapat”: a segítségnyújtáshoz megfelelő felszereléssel és eszközökkel rendelkező képzett személyek csoportja, amelyet a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél jelöl ki a segítségnyújtásra;

f) „Szakértő”: megfelelő felszereléssel és eszközökkel rendelkező személy, aki a segítségnyújtásban speciális tevékenységet fejt ki önállóan, egy csoport tagjaként vagy azzal a mentőcsapattal együttműködve, amelybe beosztották;

g) „Felszerelés”: eszközök, szállítóeszközök, egyéni és közös használatra való anyagok és tárgyak, amelyeket a mentőcsapatok és a szakértők használnak;

h) „Segélyszállítmány”: élelmiszer, ivóvíz, gyógyszerek és orvosi felszerelések és más eszközök, amelyeket térítésmentesen osztanak szét a veszélyeztetett lakosságnak vagy egy katasztrófa áldozatainak a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén a katasztrófa hatásainak csökkentése érdekében;

i) „Személyes adatok”: Bármely azonosított vagy azonosítható természetes személyre vonatkozó információ. Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában ezek: a családi és utónév, születési idő, lakcím, foglalkozásra, szakképzettségre, munkahelyre és szükség esetén az egészségi állapotra vonatkozó adatok.

3. cikk

Illetékes hatóságok

(1) A Szerződő Felek meghatározzák a jelen Egyezmény végrehajtására hatáskörrel rendelkező minisztériumaikat, és a jelen Egyezmény I. cikkében meghatározott együttműködési területeken a közvetlen kapcsolat tartására illetékes hatóságok

- a magyar Szerződő Fél részéről: a BM Országos Katasztrófavédelmi Főigazgatóság,

- a szerb Szerződő Fél részéről: a BM Veszélyhelyzet-kezelési Részleg.

(2) E célból a Szerződő Felek az illetékes hatóságok, a kapcsolattartásra kijelölt szervezetek és személyek adataiban bekövetkezett változásról tájékoztatják egymást.

4. cikk

Az együttműködés szereplői

A Szerződő Felek a jelen Egyezmény céljainak megvalósítása érdekében segítik és ösztönzik a kölcsönös együttműködés minden formáját illetékes hatóságaik, kormányzati és nem-kormányzati szervezeteik között.

5. cikk

A segítségnyújtás költségeinek megtérítése

Amennyiben a Szerződő Felek közös megegyezéssel másként nem állapodnak meg, a jelen Egyezmény I. cikkében meghatározott együttműködés és segítségnyújtás ingyenes.

6. cikk

A segítségséget kérő Szerződő Fél államhatárának átlépése és a területén való tartózkodás

(1) A Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságainak meg kell egyezniük a határátlépés helyéről és idejéről, az érkezés és távozás módjáról, valamint a mentőcsapatoknak és a szakértőknek a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén történő ott-tartózkodásának időtartamáról.

(2) A mentőcsapatok tagjai, valamint a szakértők segítségnyújtás céljából a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államában hatályos jogszabályokban meghatározott feltételek szerint léphetnek be, illetve tartózkodhatnak a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén.

(3) A mentőcsapatok tagjai, valamint a szakértők abban az esetben viselhetnek egyenruhát a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén, ha ez az egyenruha a szokásos felszerelésük részét képezi.

(4) Ezen cikk (1)-(3) bekezdéseinek rendelkezései akkor is alkalmazandók, ha az egyik Szerződő Fél állama tranzitország, a másik Szerződő Fél pedig segítséget kérő vagy segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél. A Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai a lehető legrövidebb időn belül tájékoztatják egymást a másik fél tranzitországként történő igénybevételének szükségességéről, intézkednek annak lebonyolításáról, illetve ha szükséges, gondoskodnak a mentőcsapat és a szakértők kíséréséről.

(5) A segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél területén való tartózkodás időtartama alatt a mentőcsapatok tagjaira és a szakértőkre az adott államban hatályos nemzeti jogszabályok az irányadók.

7. cikk

A felszerelések és a segélyszállítmány behozatala, kivitele és államhatárokon át történő szállítása

(1) A Szerződő Felek lehetővé teszik a felszerelések és a segélyszállítmány érintett államok határain keresztül történő behozatalát, kivitelét és az államaik határain át történő szállítását. Az államhatár átlépésekor a mentőcsapat vezetője vagy a szakértő a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának illetékes vámhatóságai részére az áruk vám elé állítása során a felszerelések, valamint a segélyszállítmányban foglaltak listáját benyújtja a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél hivatalos nyelvén és angol nyelven.

(2) A felszerelések és a segélyszállítmány behozatala, kivitele, szállítása, vámeljárás alá vonása, valamint a behozatali vám alóli mentesítés az érintett Szerződő Fél államának területén hatályos vámjogszabályok és feltételek szerint és illetékességi körében kerül lebonyolításra.

(3) A mentőcsapatok és a szakértők csak a felszerelést, a segélyszállítmányt és a saját ellátásukat szolgáló eszközöket vihetik be a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területére.

(4) Amennyiben a felszerelést nem használták fel teljes egészében a segítségnyújtás során, azt - a hatályos vámjogszabályok figyelembe vételével - vissza kell szállítani a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél államának területére. Amennyiben a felszerelés humanitárius segélyként a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél területén marad, a felszerelés típusára, mennyiségére és területi elhelyezkedésére vonatkozó információt el kell juttatni a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságának, amely ezt követően tájékoztatja erről a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának illetékes vámhatóságát.

(5) A segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél lehetővé teszi a mentőcsapatok és a szakértők felszerelésének szennyeződéstől való mentesítését. Amennyiben ez nem lehetséges, a felszerelés a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén hagyható.

(6) Kábítószereket és pszichotróp anyagokat tartalmazó gyógyszerek csak a szükséges orvosi segítségnyújtás céljából vihetők be a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területére, és kizárólag képzett egészségügyi személyzet felügyelete alatt és a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél államának nemzeti jogszabályai szerint használhatók fel. A mentőcsapat vezetője mindkét Szerződő Fél államának illetékes vámhatóságai részére benyújtja a kábítószereket és pszichotróp anyagokat tartalmazó gyógyszerek listáját, a nevek és mennyiségek feltüntetésével. A segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél tájékoztatja a segítséget kérő Szerződő Felet a kábítószereket és pszichotróp anyagokat tartalmazó gyógyszerek felhasználásáról. A kábítószereket és pszichotróp anyagokat tartalmazó megmaradt gyógyszereket vissza kell szállítani a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél államának területére a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél vámhatóságának felügyelete mellett a gyógyszerek nevét és mennyiségét tartalmazó dokumentáció alapján. Ez az áruforgalom nem tekintendő exportnak illetve importnak a Szerződő Feleket kötelező, kábítószerekre és pszichotróp anyagokra vonatkozó nemzetközi szerződések alapján.

(7) A mentőcsapatok és szakértők által használt járművek, és a felszerelés és segélyszállítmány szállítását biztosító járművek részére nem kötelező a nemzetközi közúti szállításra vonatkozó engedélyeztetés.

(8) Ezen cikk (1)-(7) bekezdéseinek rendelkezései akkor is alkalmazandók, ha az egyik Szerződő Fél állama tranzitország, a másik Szerződő Fél pedig segítséget kérő vagy segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél.

8. cikk

Segítségnyújtásra irányuló megkeresés

(1) A segítségnyújtásra a segítségnyújtást kérő Szerződő Fél megkeresése alapján, a Szerződő Felek államainak nemzeti, hatályos jogszabályai szerint kerül sor.

(2) A segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél tájékoztatást ad a segítséget nyújtó Fél részére a katasztrófa jellegéről, kiterjedéséről, már bekövetkezett és várható következményeiről, az igényelt segítség jellegéről és formájáról.

(3) A segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél késedelem nélkül tájékoztatja a másik Szerződő Felet válaszáról, valamint segítségnyújtási lehetőségeiről.

9. cikk

Segítségnyújtás

(1) A műveleteket minden esetben a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága irányítja.

(2) A segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél felszereléseinek felhasználási módjáról a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai megállapodnak.

(3) A segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél mentőcsapatait kizárólag a mentőcsapat vezetőjén keresztül irányíthatja.

10. cikk

Légi- és vízi járművek alkalmazása

(1) A mentőcsapatok és a szakértők, a felszereléseik és a segélyszállítmány szállítására, valamint a jelen Egyezményben foglaltak szerinti mentési műveletek végrehajtására igénybe vehetők légi- és vízi járművek.

(2) A légi- és vízi járművek használatáról értesíteni szükséges a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságát, megadva a légi jármű típusát és lajstromjelét, a vízi jármű típusát, nevét illetve jelzését, vagy lajstromjelét, a személyzet és a rakomány adatait, a leszálló légijármű, illetve a kikötő vízi jármű érkezésének időpontját, várható útvonalát, érkezésének helyét, benyújtva a légijármű repülési tervét, összhangban a Szerződő Felek államának nemzeti jogszabályaival.

(3) A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni a légi- és a vízi jármű személyzetére is.

(4) A jelen Egyezményben foglalt célokra állami légijárművek csak a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél határozott beleegyezésével használhatók fel.

11. cikk

Információk bizalmas kezelése

(1) A jelen Egyezmény alapján végzett tevékenység során szerzett információk harmadik félnek csak a Szerződő Felek előzetes hozzájárulása alapján adhatók át, és csak akkor hozhatók nyilvánosságra, ha erről a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai előzetesen írásban hozzájárulásukat adták.

(2) Abban az esetben, ha a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai a jelen Egyezmény alapján személyes adatokat adnak át egymásnak, az egyének védelméről a személyes adatok gépi feldolgozása során, Strasbourgban, 1981. január 28. napján aláírt Egyezmény, valamint a Strasbourgban, 2001. november 8-án aláírt Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyve rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni.

12. cikk

Viták rendezése

A jelen Egyezmény értelmezéséből vagy alkalmazásából eredő esetleges vitákat a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai tárgyalások útján, szükség esetén diplomáciai úton rendezik.

13. cikk

Kártérítés

(1) A Szerződő Felek lemondanak minden, a mentőcsapat tagja vagy a szakértő által a jelen Megállapodás szerinti segítségnyújtás során okozott vagyoni és környezeti kár megtérítésének a másik Szerződő Féltől történő követeléséről, amennyiben a Szerződő Felek nem állapodnak meg másként.

(2) A Szerződő Felek lemondanak minden, a jelen Szerződés alapján történt segítségnyújtás során okozott sérülés, maradandó sérülés vagy a mentőcsapat tagjának vagy a szakértőnek a halála esetén a kár megtérítésének a másik Szerződő Féltől történő követeléséről.

(3) Amennyiben a segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél mentőcsapatának tagja vagy szakértője harmadik személynek okoz kárt a jelen Egyezmény alapján folytatott segítségnyújtással összefüggésben a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén, az ilyen kár megtérítéséért a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél felel.

(4) Ezen cikk (1)-(3) rendelkezései nem vonatkoznak az olyan esetekre, amikor a kárt szándékosan vagy súlyos gondatlansággal okozták.

(5) Ezen cikk (1)-(4) bekezdéseinek rendelkezései csak a jelen Egyezmény végrehajtása során a segítséget kérő Szerződő Fél államának területén okozott károkra vonatkoznak.

(6) A Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai szorosan együttműködnek a jelen Egyezmény szerinti segítségnyújtás során bekövetkezett személyi sérülések, halálesetek és károk kivizsgálásában. Ebből a célból megosztják egymással a szükséges információkat.

(7) Ezen cikk rendelkezései akkor is alkalmazandók, ha az egyik Szerződő Fél állama tranzitország, a másik Szerződő Fél pedig segítséget kérő vagy segítséget nyújtó Szerződő Fél.

14. cikk

Az Egyezmény más nemzetközi Egyezményekhez való viszonya

(1) A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezései nem érintik a Szerződő Felek egyéb két- vagy többoldalú nemzetközi szerződésekben szereplő kötelezettségvállalásait.

(2) A jelen Egyezmény nem befolyásolja azokat a kötelezettségeket, amelyek Magyarország európai uniós tagságából, vagy Magyarország és a Szerb Köztársaság nemzetközi szervezetekben való tagságából fakadnak.

15. cikk

Hatálybalépés

(1) A jelen Egyezmény azon utolsó értesítés kézhezvételét követő 30. napon lép hatályba, amelyben a Szerződő Felek kölcsönösen tájékoztatják egymást a hatálybalépéshez szükséges belső jogi eljárások befejeződéséről.

(2) A jelen Egyezmény határozatlan időre szól. Bármelyik Szerződő Fél felmondhatja a jelen Egyezményt. Az Egyezmény a felmondásról szóló diplomáciai jegyzéknek a másik Szerződő Fél általi kézhezvételét követő három (3) hónap elteltével veszti hatályát.

(3) A Szerződő Felek a jelen Egyezményt közös megegyezéssel módosíthatják. A jelen Egyezmény módosításai a jelen cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott eljárás szerint lépnek hatályba.

Készült Bukarestben, 2013. év október hónap 17. napján, két eredeti példányban, magyar, szerb és angol nyelven, valamennyi szöveg egyaránt hiteles. Eltérő értelmezés esetén az angol szöveg az irányadó.

(Aláírások)”

4. § (1) E törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és a 3. § az Egyezmény 15. cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) Az Egyezmény, valamint a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter - annak ismertté válását követően - a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a katasztrófák elleni védekezésért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.