2006. évi LXXV. törvény

az ENSZ Élelmezési és Mezőgazdasági Szervezete (FAO) keretében 1951. december 6-án létrehozott és 1952. április 3-án hatályba lépett Nemzetközi Növényvédelmi Egyezménynek a FAO-konferencia 1997. novemberi, huszonkilencedik ülésszakán elfogadott, 2005. október 2-án hatályba lépett módosításaival egységes szerkezetben történő kihirdetéséről

(A Magyar Népköztársaság 1960. május 17-én csatlakozott a Nemzetközi Növényvédelmi Egyezményhez, amelynek az 1997. évi módosításait megerősítő okiratot a Magyar Köztársaság 2001. június 28-án a FAO főigazgatójánál letétbe helyezte.)

1. § Az Országgyűlés az ENSZ Élelmezési és Mezőgazdasági Szervezete (FAO) keretében 1951. december 6-án létrehozott és 1952. április 3-án hatályba lépett Nemzetközi Növényvédelmi Egyezményt (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) a FAO-konferencia 1997. novemberi, huszonkilencedik ülésszakán elfogadott, 2005. október 2-án hatályba lépett módosításaival egységes szerkezetbe foglaltan e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

2. § A módosított Egyezmény hiteles angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„International Plant Protection Convention

(New Revised Text approved by the FAO Conference at its 29th Session - November 1997)

Preamble

The contracting parties,

- recognizing the necessity for international cooperation in controlling pests of plants and plant products and in preventing their international spread, and especially their introduction into endangered areas,

- recognizing that phytosanitary measures should be technically justified, transparent and should not be applied in such a way as to constitute either a means of arbitrary or unjustified discrimination or a disguised restriction, particularly on international trade,

- desiring to ensure close coordination of measures directed to these ends,

- desiring to provide a framework for the development and application of harmonized phytosanitary measures and the elaboration of international standards to that effect,

- taking into account internationally approved principles governing the protection of plant, human and animal health, and the environment, and

- noting the agreements concluded as a result of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, including the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures,

have agreed as follows:

Article I

Purpose and responsibility

1. With the purpose of securing common and effective action to prevent the spread and introduction of pests of plants and plant products, and to promote appropriate measures for their control, the contracting parties undertake to adopt the legislative, technical and administrative measures specified in this Convention and in supplementary agreements pursuant to Article XVI.

2. Each contracting party shall assume responsibility, without prejudice to obligations assumed under other international agreements, for the fulfilment within its territories of all requirements under this Convention.

3. The division of responsibilities for the fulfilment of the requirements of this Convention between member organizations of FAO and their member states that are contracting parties shall be in accordance with their respective competencies.

4. Where appropriate, the provisions of this Convention may be deemed by contracting parties to extend, in addition to plants and plant products, to storage places, packaging, conveyances, containers, soil and any other organism, object or material capable of harbouring or spreading plant pests, particularly where international transportation is involved.

Article II

Use of terms

1. For the purpose of this Convention, the following terms shall have the meanings hereunder assigned to them:

„Area of low pest prevalence”: an area, whether all of a country, part of a country, or all or parts of several countries, as identified by the competent authorities, in which a specific pest occurs at low levels and which is subject to effective surveillance, control or eradication measures.

„Commission”: the Commission on Phytosanitary Measures established under Article XI.

„Endangered area”: an area where ecological factors favour the establishment of a pest whose presence in the area will result in economically important loss.

„Establishment”: perpetuation, for the foreseeable future, of a pest within an area after entry.

„Harmonized phytosanitary measures”: phytosanitary measures established by contracting parties based on international standards.

„International standards”: international standards established in accordance with Article X, paragraphs 1 and 2.

„Introduction”: the entry of a pest resulting in its establishment.

„Pest”: any species, strain or biotype of plant, animal or pathogenic agent injurious to plants or plant products.

„Pest risk analysis”: the process of evaluating biological or other scientific and economic evidence to determine whether a pest should be regulated and the strength of any phytosanitary measures to be taken against it.

„Phytosanitary measure”: any legislation, regulation or official procedure having the purpose to prevent the introduction and/or spread of pests.

„Plant products”: un manufactured material of plant origin (including grain) and those manufactured products that, by their nature or that of their processing, may create a risk for the introduction and spread of pests.

„Plants”: living plants and parts thereof, including seeds and germplasm.

„Quarantine pest”: a pest of potential economic importance to the area endangered thereby and not yet present there, or present but not widely distributed and being officially controlled.

„Regional standards”: standards established by a regional plant protection organization for the guidance of the members of that organization.

„Regulated article”: any plant, plant product, storage place, packaging, conveyance, container, soil and any other organism, object or material capable of harbouring or spreading pests, deemed to require phytosanitary measures, particularly where international transportation is involved.

„Regulated non-quarantine pest”: a non-quarantine pest whose presence in plants for planting affects the intended use of those plants with an economically unacceptable impact and which is therefore regulated within the territory of the importing contracting party.

„Regulated pest”: a quarantine pest or a regulated non-quarantine pest.

„Secretary”: Secretary of the Commission appointed pursuant to Article XII.

„Technically justified”: justified on the basis of conclusions reached by using an appropriate pest risk analysis or, where applicable, another comparable examination and evaluation of available scientific information.

2. The definitions set forth in this Article, being limited to the application of this Convention, shall not be deemed to affect definitions established under domestic laws or regulations of contracting parties.

Article III

Relationship with other international agreements

Nothing in this Convention shall affect the rights and obligations of the contracting parties under relevant international agreements.

Article IV

General provisions relating to the organizational arrangements for national plant protection

1. Each contracting party shall make provision, to the best of its ability, for an official national plant protection organization with the main responsibilities set out in this Article.

2. The responsibilities of an official national plant protection organization shall include the following:

a) the issuance of certificates relating to the phytosanitary regulations of the importing contracting party for consignments of plants, plant products and other regulated articles;

b) the surveillance of growing plants, including both areas under cultivation (inter alia fields, plantations, nurseries, gardens, greenhouses and laboratories) and wild flora, and of plants and plant products in storage or in transportation, particularly with the object of reporting the occurrence, outbreak and spread of pests, and of controlling those pests, including the reporting referred to under Article VIII paragraph 1 a);

c) the inspection of consignments of plants and plant products moving in international traffic, and, where appropriate, the inspection of other regulated articles, particularly with the object of preventing the introduction and/or spread of pests;

d) the disinfestation or disinfection of consignments of plants, plant products and other regulated articles moving in international traffic, to meet phytosanitary requirements;

e) the protection of endangered areas and the designation, maintenance and surveillance of pest free areas and areas of low pest prevalence;

f) the conduct of pest risk analyses;

g) to ensure through appropriate procedures that the phytosanitary security of consignments after certification regarding composition, substitution and reinfestation is maintained prior to export; and

h) training and development of staff.

3. Each contracting party shall make provision, to the best of its ability, for the following:

a) the distribution of information within the territory of the contracting party regarding regulated pests and the means of their prevention and control;

b) research and investigation in the field of plant protection;

c) the issuance of phytosanitary regulations; and

d) the performance of such other functions as may be required for the implementation of this Convention.

4. Each contracting party shall submit a description of its official national plant protection organization and of changes in such organization to the Secretary. A contracting party shall provide a description of its organizational arrangements for plant protection to another contracting party, upon request.

Article V

Phytosanitary certification

1. Each contracting party shall make arrangements for phytosanitary certification, with the objective of ensuring that exported plants, plant products and other regulated articles and consignments thereof are in conformity with the certifying statement to be made pursuant to paragraph 2 b) of this Article.

2. Each contracting party shall make arrangements for the issuance of phytosanitary certificates in conformity with the following provisions:

a) Inspection and other related activities leading to issuance of phytosanitary certificates shall be carried out only by or under the authority of the official national plant protection organization. The issuance of phytosanitary certificates shall be carried out by public officers who are technically qualified and duly authorized by the official national plant protection organization to act on its behalf and under its control with such knowledge and information available to those officers that the authorities of importing contracting parties may accept the phytosanitary certificates with confidence as dependable documents.

b) Phytosanitary certificates, or their electronic equivalent where accepted by the importing contracting party concerned, shall be as worded in the models set out in the Annex to this Convention. These certificates should be completed and issued taking into account relevant international standards.

c) Uncertified alterations or erasures shall invalidate the certificates.

3. Each contracting party undertakes not to require consignments of plants or plant products or other regulated articles imported into its territories to be accompanied by phytosanitary certificates inconsistent with the models set out in the Annex to this Convention. Any requirements for additional declarations shall be limited to those technically justified.

Article VI

Regulated pests

1. Contracting parties may require phytosanitary measures for quarantine pests and regulated non-quarantine pests, provided that such measures are:

a) no more stringent than measures applied to the same pests, if present within the territory of the importing contracting party; and

b) limited to what is necessary to protect plant health and/or safeguard the intended use and can be technically justified by the contracting party concerned.

2. Contracting parties shall not require phytosanitary measures for non-regulated pests.

Article VII

Requirements in relation to imports

1. With the aim of preventing the introduction and/or spread of regulated pests into their territories, contracting parties shall have sovereign authority to regulate, in accordance with applicable international agreements, the entry of plants and plant products and other regulated articles and, to this end, may:

a) prescribe and adopt phytosanitary measures concerning the importation of plants, plant products and other regulated articles, including, for example, inspection, prohibition on importation, and treatment;

b) refuse entry or detain, or require treatment, destruction or removal from the territory of the contracting party, of plants, plant products and other regulated articles or consignments thereof that do not comply with the phytosanitary measures prescribed or adopted under subparagraph a);

c) prohibit or restrict the movement of regulated pests into their territories;

d) prohibit or restrict the movement of biological control agents and other organisms of phytosanitary concern claimed to be beneficial into their territories.

2. In order to minimize interference with international trade, each contracting party, in exercising its authority under paragraph 1 of this Article, undertakes to act in conformity with the following:

a) Contracting parties shall not, under their phytosanitary legislation, take any of the measures specified in paragraph 1 of this Article unless such measures are made necessary by phytosanitary considerations and are technically justified.

b) Contracting parties shall, immediately upon their adoption, publish and transmit phytosanitary requirements, restrictions and prohibitions to any contracting party or parties that they believe may be directly affected by such measures.

c) Contracting parties shall, on request, make available to any contracting party the rationale for phytosanitary requirements, restrictions and prohibitions.

d) If a contracting party requires consignments of particular plants or plant products to be imported only through specified points of entry, such points shall be so selected as not to unnecessarily impede international trade. The contracting party shall publish a list of such points of entry and communicate it to the Secretary, any regional plant protection organization of which the contracting party is a member, all contracting parties which the contracting party believes to be directly affected, and other contracting parties upon request. Such restrictions on points of entry shall not be made unless the plants, plant products or other regulated articles concerned are required to be accompanied by phytosanitary certificates or to be submitted to inspection or treatment.

e) Any inspection or other phytosanitary procedure required by the plant protection organization of a contracting party for a consignment of plants, plant products or other regulated articles offered for importation, shall take place as promptly as possible with due regard to their perishability.

Importing contracting parties shall, as soon as possible, inform the exporting contracting party concerned or, where appropriate, the re-exporting contracting party concerned, of significant instances of non-compliance with phytosanitary certification. The exporting contracting party or, where appropriate, the reexporting contracting party concerned, should investigate and, on request, report the result of its investigation to the importing contracting party concerned.

g) Contracting parties shall institute only phytosanitary measures that are technically justified, consistent with the pest risk involved and represent the least restrictive measures available, and result in the minimum impediment to the international movement of people, commodities and conveyances.

h) Contracting parties shall, as conditions change, and as new facts become available, ensure that phytosanitary measures are promptly modified or removed if found to be unnecessary.

i) Contracting parties shall, to the best of their ability, establish and update lists of regulated pests, using scientific names, and make such lists available to the Secretary, to regional plant protection organizations of which they are members and, on request, to other contracting parties.

j) Contracting parties shall, to the best of their ability, conduct surveillance for pests and develop and maintain adequate information on pest status in order to support categorization of pests, and for the development of appropriate phytosanitary measures. This information shall be made available to contracting parties, on request.

3. A contracting party may apply measures specified in this Article to pests which may not be capable of establishment in its territories but, if they gained entry, cause economic damage. Measures taken against these pests must be technically justified.

4. Contracting parties may apply measures specified in this Article to consignments in transit through their territories only where such measures are technically justified and necessary to prevent the introduction and/or spread of pests.

5. Nothing in this Article shall prevent importing contracting parties from making special provision, subject to adequate safeguards, for the importation, for the purpose of scientific research, education, or other specific use, of plants and plant products and other regulated articles, and of plant pests.

6. Nothing in this Article shall prevent any contracting party from taking appropriate emergency action on the detection of a pest posing a potential threat to its territories or the report of such a detection. Any such action shall be evaluated as soon as possible to ensure that its continuance is justified. The action taken shall be immediately reported to contracting parties concerned, the Secretary, and any regional plant protection organization of which the contracting party is a member.

Article VIII

International cooperation

1. The contracting parties shall cooperate with one another to the fullest practicable extent in achieving the aims of this Convention, and shall in particular:

a) cooperate in the exchange of information on plant pests, particularly the reporting of the occurrence, outbreak or spread of pests that may be of immediate or potential danger, in accordance with such procedures as may be established by the Commission;

b) participate, in so far as is practicable, in any special campaigns for combatting pests that may seriously threaten crop production and need international action to meet the emergencies; and

c) cooperate, to the extent practicable, in providing technical and biological information necessary for pest risk analysis.

2. Each contracting party shall designate a contact point for the exchange of information connected with the implementation of this Convention.

Article IX

Regional plant protection organizations

1. The contracting parties undertake to cooperate with one another in establishing regional plant protection organizations in appropriate areas.

2. The regional plant protection organizations shall function as the coordinating bodies in the areas covered, shall participate in various activities to achieve the objectives of this Convention and, where appropriate, shall gather and disseminate information.

3. The regional plant protection organizations shall cooperate with the Secretary in achieving the objectives of the Convention and, where appropriate, cooperate with the Secretary and the Commission in developing international standards.

4. The Secretary will convene regular Technical Consultations of representatives of regional plant protection organizations to:

a) promote the development and use of relevant international standards for phytosanitary measures; and

b) encourage inter-regional cooperation in promoting harmonized phytosanitary measures for controlling pests and in preventing their spread and/or introduction.

Article X

Standards

1. The contracting parties agree to cooperate in the development of international standards in accordance with the procedures adopted by the Commission.

2. International standards shall be adopted by the Commission.

3. Regional standards should be consistent with the principles of this Convention; such standards may be deposited with the Commission for consideration as candidates for international standards for phytosanitary measures if more broadly applicable.

4. Contracting parties should take into account, as appropriate, international standards when undertaking activities related to this Convention.

Article XI

Commission on Phytosanitary Measures

1. Contracting parties agree to establish the Commission on Phytosanitary Measures within the framework of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).

2. The functions of the Commission shall be to promote the full implementation of the objectives of the Convention and, in particular, to:

a) review the state of plant protection in the world and the need for action to control the international spread of pests and their introduction into endangered areas;

b) establish and keep under review the necessary institutional arrangements and procedures for the development and adoption of international standards, and to adopt international standards;

c) establish rules and procedures for the resolution of disputes in accordance with Article XIII;

d) establish such subsidiary bodies of the Commission as may be necessary for the proper implementation of its functions;

e) adopt guidelines regarding the recognition of regional plant protection organizations;

f) establish cooperation with other relevant international organizations on matters covered by this Convention;

g) adopt such recommendations for the implementation of the Convention as necessary; and

h) perform such other functions as may be necessary to the fulfilment of the objectives of this Convention.

3. Membership in the Commission shall be open to all contracting parties.

4. Each contracting party may be represented at sessions of the Commission by a single delegate who may be accompanied by an alternate, and by experts and advisers. Alternates, experts and advisers may take part in the proceedings of the Commission but may not vote, except in the case of an alternate who, is duly authorized to substitute for the delegate.

5. The contracting parties shall make every effort to reach agreement on all matters by consensus. If all efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted and no agreement is reached, the decision shall, as a last resort, be taken by a two-thirds majority of the contracting parties present and voting.

6. A member organization of FAO that is a contracting party and the member states of that member organization that are contracting parties shall exercise their membership rights and fulfil their membership obligations in accordance, mutatis mutandis, with the Constitution and General Rules of FAO.

7. The Commission may adopt and amend, as required, its own Rules of Procedure, which shall not be inconsistent with this Convention or with the Constitution of FAO.

8. The Chairperson of the Commission shall convene an annual regular session of the Commission.

9. Special sessions of the Commission shall be convened by the Chairperson of the Commission at the request of at least one-third of its members.

10. The Commission shall elect its Chairperson and no more than two Vice-Chairpersons, each of whom shall serve for a term of two years.

Article XII

Secretariat

1. The Secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by the Director-General of FAO.

2. The Secretary shall be assisted by such secretariat staff as may be required.

3. The Secretary shall be responsible for implementing the policies and activities of the Commission and carrying out such other functions as may be assigned to the Secretary by this Convention and shall report thereon to the Commission.

4. The Secretary shall disseminate:

a) international standards to all contracting parties within sixty days of adoption;

b) to all contracting parties, lists of points of entry under Article VII paragraph 2 d) communicated by contracting parties;

c) lists of regulated pests whose entry is prohibited or referred to in Article VII paragraph 2 i) to all contracting parties and regional plant protection organizations;

d) information received from contracting parties on phytosanitary requirements, restrictions and prohibitions referred to in Article VII paragraph 2 b), and descriptions of official national plant protection organizations referred to in Article IV paragraph 4.

5. The Secretary shall provide translations in the official languages of FAO of documentation for meetings of the Commission and international standards.

6. The Secretary shall cooperate with regional plant protection organizations in achieving the aims of the Convention.

Article XIII

Settlement of disputes

1. If there is any dispute regarding the interpretation or application of this Convention, or if a contracting party considers that any action by another contracting party is in conflict with the obligations of the latter under Articles V and VII of this Convention, especially regarding the basis of prohibiting or restricting the imports of plants, plant products or other regulated articles coming from its territories, the contracting parties concerned shall consult among themselves as soon as possible with a view to resolving the dispute.

2. If the dispute cannot be resolved by the means referred to in paragraph 1, the contracting party or parties concerned may request the Director-General of FAO to appoint a committee of experts to consider the question in dispute, in accordance with rules and procedures that may be established by the Commission.

3. This Committee shall include representatives designated by each contracting party concerned. The Committee shall consider the question in dispute, taking into account all documents and other forms of evidence submitted by the contracting parties concerned. The Committee shall prepare a report on the technical aspects of the dispute for the purpose of seeking its resolution. The preparation of the report and its approval shall be according to rules and procedures established by the Commission, and it shall be transmitted by the Director-General to the contracting parties concerned. The report may also be submitted, upon its request, to the competent body of the international organization responsible for resolving trade disputes.

4. The contracting parties agree that the recommendations of such a committee, while not binding in character, will become the basis for renewed consideration by the contracting parties concerned of the matter out of which the disagreement arose.

5. The contracting parties concerned shall share the expenses of the experts.

6. The provisions of this Article shall be complementary to and not in derogation of the dispute settlement procedures provided for in other international agreements dealing with trade matters.

Article XIV

Substitution of prior agreements

This Convention shall terminate and replace, between contracting parties, the International Convention respecting measures to be taken against the Phylloxera vastatrix of 3 November 1881, the additional Convention signed at Berne on 15 April 1889 and the International Convention for the Protection of Plants signed at Rome on 16 April 1929.

Article XV

Territorial application

1. Any contracting party may at the time of ratification or adherence or at any time thereafter communicate to the Director-General of FAO a declaration that this Convention shall extend to all or any of the territories for the international relations of which it is responsible, and this Convention shall be applicable to all territories specified in the declaration as from the thirtieth day after the receipt of the declaration by the Director-General.

2. Any contracting party which has communicated to the Director-General of FAO a declaration in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article may at any time communicate a further declaration modifying the scope of any former declaration or terminating the application of the provisions of the present Convention in respect of any territory. Such modification or termination shall take effect as from the thirtieth day after the receipt of the declaration by the Director-General.

3. The Director-General of FAO shall inform all contracting parties of any declaration received under this Article.

Article XVI

Supplementary agreements

1. The contracting parties may, for the purpose of meeting special problems of plant protection which need particular attention or action, enter into supplementary agreements. Such agreements may be applicable to specific regions, to specific pests, to specific plants and plant products, to specific methods of international transportation of plants arid plant products, or otherwise supplement the provisions of this Convention.

2. Any such supplementary agreements shall come into force for each contracting party concerned after acceptance in accordance with the provisions of the supplementary agreements concerned.

3. Supplementary agreements shall promote the intent of this Convention and shall conform to the principles and provisions of this Convention, as well as to the principles of transparency, non-discrimination and the avoidance of disguised restrictions, particularly on international trade.

Article XVII

Ratification and adherence

1. This Convention shall be open for signature by all states until 1 May 1952 and shall be ratified at the earliest possible date. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Director-General of FAO, who shall give notice of the date of deposit to each of the signatory states.

2. As soon as this Convention has come into force in accordance with Article XXII it shall be open for adherence by non-signatory states and member organizations of FAO. Adherence shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of adherence with the Director-General of FAO, who shall notify all contracting parties.

3. When a member organization of FAO becomes a contracting party to this Convention, the member organization shall, in accordance with the provisions of Article II paragraph 7 of the FAO Constitution, as appropriate, notify at the time of its adherence such modifications or clarifications to its declaration of competence submitted under Article II paragraph 5 of the FAO Constitution as may be necessary in light of its acceptance of this Convention. Any contracting party to this Convention may, at any time, request a member organization of FAO that is a contracting party to this Convention to provide information as to which, as between the member organization and its member states, is responsible for the implementation of any particular matter covered by this Convention. The member organization shall provide this information within a reasonable time.

Article XVIII

Non-contracting parties

The contracting parties shall encourage any state or member organization of FAO, not a party to this Convention, to accept this Convention, and shall encourage any non-contracting party to apply phytosanitary measures consistent with the provisions of this Convention and any international standards adopted hereunder.

Article XIX

Languages

1. The authentic languages of this Convention shall be all official languages of FAO.

2. Nothing in this Convention shall be construed as requiring contracting parties to provide and to publish documents or to provide copies of them other than in the language(s) of the contracting party, except as stated in paragraph 3 below.

3. The following documents shall be in at least one of the official languages of FAO:

a) information provided according to Article IV paragraph 4;

b) cover notes giving bibliographical data on documents transmitted according to Article VII paragraph 2 b);

c) information provided according to Article VII paragraph 2 b), d), i) and j);

d) notes giving bibliographical data and a short summary of relevant documents on information provided according to Article VIII paragraph 1 a);

e) requests for information from contact points as well as replies to such requests, but not including any attached documents;

f) any document made available by contracting parties for meetings of the Commission.

Article XX

Technical assistance

The contracting parties agree to promote the provision of technical assistance to contracting parties, especially those that are developing contracting parties, either bilaterally or through the appropriate international organizations, with the objective of facilitating the implementation of this Convention.

Article XXI

Amendment

1. Any proposal by a contracting party for the amendment of this Convention shall be communicated to the Director-General of FAO.

2. Any proposed amendment of this Convention received by the Director-General of FAO from a contracting party shall be presented to a regular or special session of the Commission for approval and, if the amendment involves important technical changes or imposes additional obligations on the contracting parties, it shall be considered by an advisory committee of specialists convened by FAO prior to the Commission.

3. Notice of any proposed amendment of this Convention, other than amendments to the Annex, shall be transmitted to the contracting parties by the Director-General of FAO not later than the time when the agenda of the session of the Commission at which the matter is to be considered is dispatched.

4. Any such proposed amendment of this Convention shall require the approval of the Commission and shall come into force as from the thirtieth day after acceptance by two-thirds of the contracting parties. For the purpose of this Article, an instrument deposited by a member organization of FAO shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by member states of such an organization.

5. Amendments involving new obligations for contracting parties, however, shall come into force in respect of each contracting party only on acceptance by it and as from the thirtieth day after such acceptance. The instruments of acceptance of amendments involving new obligations shall be deposited with the Director-General of FAO, who shall inform all contracting parties of the receipt of acceptance and the entry into force of amendments.

6. Proposals for amendments to the model phytosanitary certificates set out in the Annex to this Convention shall be sent to the Secretary and shall be considered for approval by the Commission. Approved amendments to the model phytosanitary certificates set out in the Annex to this Convention shall become effective ninety days after their notification to the contracting parties by the Secretary.

7. For a period of not more than twelve months from an amendment to the model phytosanitary certificates set out in the Annex to this Convention becoming effective, the previous version of the phytosanitary certificates shall also be legally valid for the purpose of this Convention.

Article XXII

Entry into force

As soon as this Convention has been ratified by three signatory states it shall come into force among them. It shall come into force for each state or member organization of FAO ratifying or adhering thereafter from the date of deposit of its instrument of ratification or adherence.

Article XXIII

Denunciation

1. Any contracting party may at any time give notice of denunciation of this Convention by notification addressed to the Director-General of FAO. The Director-General shall at once inform all contracting parties.

2. Denunciation shall take effect one year from the date of receipt of the notification by the Director-General of FAO.

ANNEX

Model Phytosanitary Certificate

No. ..................................

Plant Protection Organization of .....................................................................................................

TO: Plant Protection Organization(s) of ..........................................................................................

I. Description of Consignment

Name and address of exporter: .......................................................................................................

Declared name and address of consignee: .......................................................................................

Number and description of packages: ..............................................................................................

Distinguishing marks: .....................................................................................................................

Place of origin: ..............................................................................................................................

Declared means of conveyance: .........................................................................................................

Declared point of entry: .....................................................................................................................

Name of produce and quantity declared: .............................................................................................

Botanical name of plants: .....................................................................................................................

This is to certify that the plants, plant products or other regulated articles described herein have been inspected and/or tested according to appropriate official procedures and are considered to be free from the quarantine pests specified by the importing contracting party and to conform with the current phytosanitary requirements of the importing contracting party, including those for regulated non-quarantine pests.

They are deemed to be practically free from other pests. 

II. Additional Declaration

III. Disinfestation and/or Disinfection Treatment

Date ............................... Treatment ............................... Chemical (active ingredient) ...................

Duration and temperature ........................................ Concentration ...............................................

Additional information ..................................................................................................................

 

 Place of issue .................................................................................

 (Stamp of Organization)

 Name of authorized officer...............................................................

 

 Date ...............................................................................................

 

 (Signature)

No financial liability with respect to this certificate shall attach to ................................. (name of Plant Protection Organization) or to any of its officers or representatives. 

Model Phytosanitary Certificate for Re Export

No. .................................................................

Plant Protection Organization of .....................................................................................................

(contracting party of re-export)

TO: Plant Protection Organization(s) of ..........................................................................................

[contracting party(ies) of import]

I. Description of Consignment

Name and address of exporter: .......................................................................................................

Declared name and address of consignee: .........................................................................................

Number and description of packages: .............................................................................................

Distinguishing marks: .....................................................................................................................

Place of origin: ..............................................................................................................................

Declared means of conveyance: ......................................................................................................

Declared point of entry: .................................................................................................................

Name of produce and quantity declared: .........................................................................................

Botanical name of plants: ...............................................................................................................

This is to certify that the plants, plant products or other regulated articles described above ........ were imported into (contracting party of re-export) .......... from .................................. (contracting party of origin) covered by Phytosanitary Certificate No. ................  original [...] certified true copy [...] of which is attached to this certificate; that they are packed [...] repacked [...] in original [...] new [...] containers; that based on the original phytosanitary certificate [...] and additional inspection [...], they are considered to conform with the current phytosanitary requirements of the importing contracting party, and that during storage in ..... (contracting party of re-export), the consignment has not been subjected to the risk of infestation or infection.

II. Additional Declaration

III. Disinfestation and/or Disinfection Treatment

Date ............................... Treatment ............................... Chemical (active ingredient) ...................

Duration and temperature ........................................ Concentration ...............................................

Additional information ...................................................................................................................

 

 Place of issue .................................................................................

 (Stamp of Organization)

 Name of authorized officer...............................................................

 

 Date ...............................................................................................

 

 (Signature)

No financial liability with respect to this certificate shall attach to ................................. (name of Plant Protection Organization) or to any of its officers or representatives. 

Nemzetközi Növényvédelmi Egyezmény

(A FAO Konferencia 1997. novemberi, 29. ülésszakán elfogadott új, módosított szöveg)

Bevezetés

A szerződő felek

- felismerve a nemzetközi együttműködés szükségességét a növények és növényi termékek károsítói elleni védekezésben és azok nemzetközi elterjedésének megakadályozásában, különösképpen a veszélyeztetett területekre való behurcolásuk megakadályozásában,

- felismerve, hogy a növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseknek szakmailag indokoltaknak, áttekinthetőknek kell lenniük, és nem lehet azokat olyan módon alkalmazni, hogy akár önkényes, akár pedig indokolatlan megkülönböztetést vagy burkolt korlátozást jelentsenek, különösen a nemzetközi kereskedelem vonatkozásában,

- biztosítani kívánva a fenti célok elérésére irányuló intézkedések szoros koordinálását,

- gondoskodni kívánva az összehangolt növény-egészségügyi intézkedések kidolgozására és alkalmazására alkalmas keret létrehozásáról és ennek érdekében nemzetközi szabványok kidolgozásáról,

- figyelembe véve a növényvédelemre, az ember és az állat egészsége valamint a környezet védelmére nézve irányadó, nemzetközileg elfogadott alapelveket, és

- figyelembe véve a multilaterális kereskedelmi tárgyalások uruguay-i fordulójának eredményeként megkötött egyezményeket, beleértve az állat-egészségügyi és növény-egészségügyi intézkedések alkalmazásáról szóló egyezményt,

elfogadták a következőket:

I. cikk

Cél és felelősség

1. Annak érdekében, hogy közös és eredményes lépéseket lehessen tenni a növények és növényi termékek károsítóinak elterjedése és behurcolása ellen, és elő lehessen mozdítani az ellenük való védekezésre alkalmas megfelelő intézkedéseket, a szerződő felek vállalják, hogy elfogadják azokat a jogszabályi, szakmai és igazgatási intézkedéseket, amelyeket a jelen Egyezmény és annak XVI. cikke értelmében kötött kiegészítő megállapodások tartalmaznak.

2. Valamennyi szerződő fél az egyéb nemzetközi szerződések értelmében vállalt kötelezettségeinek egyidejű fenntartásával felelősséget vállal azért, hogy saját területén teljesítse a jelen Egyezményből fakadó valamennyi előírást.

3. A jelen Egyezményből származó előírások teljesítéséért viselt felelősség a FAO tagszervezetei, és olyan tagállamai között, amelyek egyúttal szerződő felek, ezek hatásköreinek megfelelően oszlik meg.

4. Ahol szükséges, a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseit a szerződő felek tekinthetik úgy, mint amelyek a növényeken és növényi termékeken túlmenőén kiterjednek a tároló helyekre, csomagolásra, szállításra, csomagolóanyagra, göngyölegre, a talajra és bármely más olyan szervezetre, tárgyra vagy anyagra, amely alkalmas arra, hogy növényi károsítóknak búvóhelyet nyújtson, vagy azokat terjessze, különösen a nemzetközi fuvarozásban.

II. cikk

Meghatározások

1. A jelen Egyezmény céljai szempontjából az alábbi kifejezések jelentése a következő:

„Alacsony fertőzöttségű terület”: az illetékes hatóság által meghatározott olyan terület, pl. ország, országrész, vagy több ország területe vagy részei, ahol egy adott károsító alacsony szinten fordul elő, és ahol hatékony felderítési rendszert működtetnek, védekezési vagy felszámolási intézkedést hajtanak végre.

„Bizottság”: a XI. cikk értelmében létrehozott, Növény-egészségügyi Intézkedésekkel foglalkozó Bizottság.

„Veszélyeztetett terület”: olyan terület, amelyen az ökológiai tényezők elősegítik azon károsítók megtelepedést, amelyeknek jelenléte az adott területen gazdasági szempontból jelentős veszteségeket okoz.

„Megtelepedés”: a károsító bekerülése utáni belátható jövőben annak folyamatos jelenléte egy adott területen.

„Összehangolt növény-egészségügyi intézkedések”: a szerződő felek általa nemzetközi szabványok alapján meghatározott növény-egészségügyi intézkedések.

„Nemzetközi szabványok”: a X. cikk 1. és 2. pontjának megfelelően kidolgozott nemzetközi szabványok.

„Behurcolás”: a károsító bekerülése, mely annak megtelepedéséhez vezet.

„Károsító”: a növényre vagy növényi termékre káros bármely növény, állat vagy kórokozó faj, törzs, vagy biotípus.

„Károsító veszélyességi elemzés”: biológiai vagy más tudományos és gazdasági bizonyítékok értékelésének folyamata annak meghatározására, hogy egy károsító vizsgálatkötelezett legyen-e, és az ellene végrehajtandó növény-egészségügyi intézkedések milyen szigorúak legyenek.

„Növény-egészségügyi intézkedés”: bármely törvény, előírás vagy hatósági eljárás, melynek célja a károsító behurcolásának és/vagy terjedésének megakadályozása.

„Növényi termék”: növényi eredetű feldolgozatlan anyag (ideértve a szemes terményt is) és azok a feldolgozott anyagok, melyek természetüknél vagy a feldolgozás jellegénél fogva a károsító behurcolásának és terjedésének veszélyét jelenthetik.

„Növények”: élő növények és azok részei, a magvakat és genetikai alapanyagot is ideértve.

„Karantén (zárlati) károsító”: a veszélyeztetett területen potenciális gazdasági jelentőségű károsító, amely ott még nem fordul elő vagy előfordul, de nem terjedt el és hatósági védekezést folytatnak ellene.

„Regionális szabványok”: a regionális növényvédelmi szervezet által tagjai számára útmutatóként kidolgozott szabványok.

„Vizsgálatköteles áru”: olyan növény, növényi termék, tároló hely, csomagolóanyag, szállítóeszköz, tárolóeszköz, talaj és bármely egyéb szervezet vagy anyag, amelyekben a károsító megtelepedhet vagy amely a károsító terjedését elősegíti, amelynek hatására növény-egészségügyi intézkedést hoznak, különösen ott, ahol a nemzetközi szállítás szerepet játszik.

„Vizsgálatköteles nem-karantén (nem-zárlati) károsító”: olyan nem-karantén (nem-zárlati) károsító, amelynek jelenléte a telepítésre szánt növényekben gazdaságilag elfogadhatatlan mértékben befolyásolja e növények tervezett felhasználását, és amely ennek megfelelően vizsgálatköteles az importáló szerződő fél területén.

„Vizsgálatköteles károsító”: Karantén (zárlati) károsító vagy vizsgálatköteles nem-karantén (nem-zárlati) károsító.

„Titkár”: a Bizottságnak a XII. cikk értelmében kinevezett Titkára.

„Szakmailag indokolt”: megfelelő károsító veszélyességi elemzés vagy - ahol lehet - a rendelkezésre álló tudományos információk más, ezzel összehasonlítható vizsgálata és értékelése alapján indokolt.

2. A jelen cikkben szereplő meghatározások - minthogy azok a jelen Egyezményben való alkalmazásra korlátozódnak - nem tekinthetők úgy, mint amelyek a szerződő felek belföldi jogszabályai vagy rendelkezései értelmében meghatározott definíciókat érintenék.

III. cikk

Összefüggés más nemzetközi szerződésekkel

Jelen Egyezmény nem érinti a szerződő felekre a vonatkozó nemzetközi szerződések alapján háruló kötelezettségeket, illetve jogokat.

IV. cikk

Az országos növényvédelmi hálózat szervezeti kérdéseivel összefüggő általános rendelkezések

1. Valamennyi szerződő fél, a tőle telhető legnagyobb mértékben gondoskodik hivatalos országos növényvédelmi szervezet felállításáról, amelynek fő feladatkörét a jelen cikk határozza meg.

2. A hivatalos országos növényvédelmi szervezet feladatkörei közé tartoznak a következők:

a) az importáló szerződő fél növény-egészségügyi előírásaival összefüggő bizonyítványok kiadása, növények, növényi termékek és egyéb vizsgálatköteles áru szállítmányokhoz;

b) a fejlődő növények felügyelete, beleértve mind a megművelt területeket (egyebek között táblákat, ültetvényeket, faiskolákat, kerteket, üvegházakat és laboratóriumokat), mind pedig a vadon élő flórát, továbbá a tároló helyeken vagy szállítóeszközökön levő növényeket és növényi termékeket, különösen azzal a céllal, hogy jelenteni lehessen az ilyen károsítók előfordulását, gócszerű megjelenését és terjedését, illetve ezen károsítók elleni védekezést, beleértve a VIII. cikk 1. a) bekezdésében hivatkozott jelentést;

c) a nemzetközi kereskedelemben szállított növény- és növényitermék-szállítmányok és - ahol szükséges egyéb vizsgálatköteles áruk vizsgálata, különösen a károsítók behurcolásának és/vagy elterjedésének megakadályozása céljából;

d) a nemzetközi kereskedelemben szállított növény, növényi termék és egyéb vizsgálatköteles áruszállítmányok fertőtlenítése, a növény-egészségügyi előírások teljesítése céljából;

e) a veszélyeztetett területek védelme és a károsítómentes területek, illetve alacsony fertőzöttség területek kijelölése, fenntartása és felügyelete;

f) a károsító veszélyességi elemzések elvégzése;

g) annak biztosítása megfelelő eljárásokkal, hogy a szállítmányok növény-egészségügyi biztonsága az összetétel, a helyettesítés és az újrafertőződés vonatkozásában fennmaradjon a bizonyítvány kiadása után az export előtt; és

h) a személyzet továbbképzése és felkészültségének növelése.

3. A szerződő felek kötelesek legjobb képességeik szerint megtenni a következő intézkedéseket:

a) információ terjesztése a szerződő fél területén a vizsgálatköteles károsítók, valamint a fellépésük megakadályozása és az ellenük való védekezés eszközei tekintetében;

b) kutatás és vizsgálat a növényvédelem terén;

c) növény-egészségügyi előírások kiadása; és

d) egyéb olyan funkciók ellátása, amelyek a jelen Egyezmény végrehajtása szempontjából szükségesek lehetnek.

4. Minden szerződő fél köteles leírást adni hivatalos országos növényvédelmi szervezetéről, és az ilyen szervezetben bekövetkezett minden változásról a Titkárnak. A szerződő felek kötelesek leírást adni növényvédelmi szervezetükről más szerződő felek számára, az utóbbiak kérelmére.

V. cikk

Növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány kiadásának rendszere

1. Minden szerződő fél köteles megszervezni a növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány kiadásának rendszerét azzal a céllal, hogy az exportált növények, növényi termékek és más vizsgálatköteles áruk, illetve ezek szállítmányai megfeleljenek a jelen cikk 2. b) bekezdése értelmében kiállítandó igazoló nyilatkozatnak.

2. Minden szerződő fél köteles gondoskodni arról, hogy a növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványok kiadása a következő előírásoknak megfelelően történjen:

a) A növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványok kiadását eredményező vizsgálatok és egyéb kapcsolódó tevékenységek kizárólag a hivatalos országos növényvédelmi szervezet által, vagy annak felügyelete alatt végezhetők el. A növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány kiadását olyan köztisztviselőknek kell végezniük, akik megfelelő szakmai képzettséggel rendelkeznek, és kellő felhatalmazást kaptak a hivatalos országos növényvédelmi szervezettől arra vonatkozóan, hogy annak nevében és irányítása alatt tevékenykedjenek, az ilyen köztisztviselők rendelkezésére álló ismeretanyag és információ birtokában, oly módon, hogy az importáló szerződő felek hatóságai a növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványt hiteles okmányként bizalommal elfogadhassák.

b) A növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványt - vagy elektronikus megfelelőjét, ha azt az érintett importáló szerződő fél elfogadja - a jelen Egyezmény Mellékletében bemutatott minta szerint kell megszövegezni. A bizonyítványt a megfelelő nemzetközi szabványok figyelembevételével kell kitölteni és kiadni.

c) Nem hitelesített módosítások vagy törlések érvénytelenné teszik a bizonyítványt.

3. Mindegyik szerződő fél vállalja, hogy nem írja elő a területére behozott növény- vagy növényi termék- vagy egyéb vizsgálatköteles áru szállítmányokhoz olyan növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványok kiadását, amelyek nincsenek összhangban a jelen Egyezmény Mellékletében szereplő mintákkal. A kiegészítő nyilatkozatra vonatkozó előírásoknak a szakmailag indokolt mértékre kell korlátozódniuk.

VI. cikk

Vizsgálatköteles károsítók

1. A szerződő felek növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseket írhatnak elő a vizsgálatköteles károsítókra, valamint a vizsgálatköteles nem-karantén károsítókra, feltéve, hogy az intézkedések:

a) nem szigorúbbak, mint az ugyanilyen károsítókra alkalmazott intézkedések, ha ilyen károsítók az importáló szerződő fél területén jelen vannak; és

b) arra korlátozódnak, ami szükséges a növények egészségének védelme és/vagy a szándékolt felhasználás biztonsága szempontjából, és az érintett szerződő fél azokat szakmailag indokolni képes.

2. A szerződő felek nem írhatnak elő növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseket a nem vizsgálatköteles károsítókra.

VII. cikk

Importelőírások

1. A vizsgálatköteles károsítók behurcolásának és/vagy területükön történő elterjedésének megelőzésére a szerződő felek teljes hatósági jogkörrel rendelkeznek a növények, növényi termékek és egyéb vizsgálatköteles áruk beléptetésének a megfelelő nemzetközi egyezményekkel összhangban történő szabályozására, és ebből a célból:

a) növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseket írhatnak elő és vezethetnek be a növények, növényi termékek és egyéb vizsgálatköteles áruk bevitelére, beleértve például a növény-egészségügyi vizsgálatot, az import tilalmát és a kezelést;

b) megtagadhatják a beléptetést vagy feltartóztathatják a szállítmányt, illetve előírhatják a kezelést, a megsemmisítést, vagy a szerződő fél területéről történő eltávolítást olyan növények, növényi termékek és egyéb. vizsgálatköteles áruk vagy azok szállítmányai vonatkozásában, amelyek nem felelnek meg az a) bekezdés alapján előírt vagy bevezetett növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseknek;

c) megtilthatják vagy korlátozhatják a vizsgálatköteles károsítók területükre történő szállítását;

d) megtilthatják vagy korlátozhatják a biológiai védekezésre alkalmas anyagok és más növény-egészségügyi szempontból hasznosnak tekintett élő szervezetek területükre történő szállítását.

2. A nemzetközi kereskedelem akadályozásának minimálisra csökkentése érdekében minden szerződő fél vállalja, hogy jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében foglalt jogkörének gyakorlása során a következő elveknek megfelelően jár el:

a) A szerződő felek csak abban az esetben tesznek a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében leírt bármely intézkedést növény-egészségügyi jogszabályaik keretében, ha az ilyen intézkedéseket növény-egészségügyi megfontolások szükségessé teszik és azok szakmailag indokolhatók.

b) A szerződő felek a növény-egészségügyi előírásokat, korlátozásokat és tilalmakat meghozásuk után haladéktalanul tudomására hozzák minden olyan szerződő félnek, amelyről úgy vélik, hogy az ilyen intézkedések által közvetlenül érintett lehet.

c) A szerződő felek kérelemre bármely szerződő fél számára megindokolják a növény-egészségügyi előírásokat, korlátozásokat és tilalmakat.

d) Ha valamely szerződő fél előírja, hogy meghatározott növények vagy növényi termékek szállítmányait csak kijelölt belépési állomásokon keresztül lehet importálni, azokat úgy kell kiválasztani, hogy ne akadályozzák szükségtelenül a nemzetközi kereskedelmet. A szerződő fél köteles az ilyen belépési állomások jegyzékét közzétenni és közölni a Titkárral, minden olyan regionális növényvédelmi szervezettel, amelynek a szerződő fél tagja, minden olyan szerződő féllel, amelyről a szerződő fél úgy véli, hogy közvetlenül érintett, és kérelemre más szerződő felekkel. A belépési állomásokra vonatkozó ilyen korlátozásokat csak akkor lehet bevezetni, ha az érintett növényeket, növényi termékeket vagy más, vizsgálatköteles árut növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvánnyal kell ellátni, vagy amelyeket vizsgálatnak, illetve kezelésnek kell alávetni.

e) Minden olyan vizsgálatot vagy egyéb növény-egészségügyi eljárást, amelyet a szerződő fél növényvédelmi szervezete előír valamely növény, növényi termék vagy egyéb vizsgálatköteles áru szállítmányára, a lehető legrövidebb időn belül végre kell hajtani, kellőképpen figyelembe véve az ilyen áruk romlandó jellegét.

f) Az importáló szerződő felek kötelesek a lehető legrövidebb időn belül tájékoztatni az érintett exportáló - vagy ha arra van szükség, az érintett reexportáló - szerződő felet minden olyan jelentős esetről, amikor a növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványban foglaltak nem feleltek meg a valóságnak. Az exportáló - vagy a reexportáló - szerződő fél köteles vizsgálatot lefolytatni, és kérelemre közölni a vizsgálat eredményeit az érdekelt importáló szerződő féllel.

g) A szerződő felek csak olyan növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseket vezethetnek be, amelyek szakmailag indokoltak, összhangban állnak a fennálló károsító veszélyességgel, és a lehetséges legkevésbé korlátozó intézkedéseket képezik, illetve minimális mértékben hátráltatják a személyek, áruk és járművek nemzetközi mozgását.

h) A szerződő felek kötelesek gondoskodni arról, hogy ha a feltételek megváltoznak és új tények állnak rendelkezésre, a növény-egészségügyi intézkedéseket haladéktalanul módosítják, vagy megszüntetik, ha szükségtelennek bizonyulnak.

i) A szerződő felek legjobb képességeik szerint kötelesek a vizsgálatköteles károsítók jegyzékét összeállítani és vezetni, a tudományos elnevezések használatával és kötelesek az ilyen jegyzékeket rendelkezésre bocsátani a Titkárnak, annak a regionális növényvédelmi szervezetnek, amelynek tagjai, és kérelemre más szerződő feleknek.

j) A szerződő felek kötelesek legjobb képességeik szerint károsító felderítési rendszert működtetni, megfelelő információt gyűjteni és nyilvántartást vezetni a károsító helyzetéről annak érdekében, hogy elősegítsék a károsítók besorolását és megfelelő növény-egészségügyi intézkedések kidolgozását. Az ilyen információt kérésre a szerződő felek rendelkezésére kell bocsátani.

3. A szerződő felek életbe léptethetnek a jelen cikkben meghatározott, intézkedéseket olyan károsítók ellen is, amelyek nem képesek a területükön megtelepedni, de amelyek, ha bekerülnek e területekre, ott gazdasági kárt okoznak. Az ilyen károsítók elleni intézkedéseknek szakmailag indokoltaknak kell lenniük.

4. A szerződő felek csak abban az esetben alkalmazhatnak a jelen cikkben előírt intézkedéseket a területükön átmenő szállítmányokkal kapcsolatban, ha az ilyen intézkedések szakmailag indokoltak és szükségesek a károsítók behurcolásának és/vagy elterjedésének megelőzése érdekében.

5. A jelen cikk semmilyen tekintetben nem akadályozhatja az importáló szerződő feleket abban, hogy különleges intézkedéseket tegyenek - megfelelő biztosítékok mellett - növényeknek; növényi termékeknek és egyéb vizsgálatköteles áruknak, továbbá növényi károsítóknak tudományos kutatás, oktatás vagy egyéb speciális felhasználás céljából történő behozatalára vonatkozóan.

6. A jelen cikk semmilyen tekintetben nem akadályozhatja meg a szerződő feleket abban, hogy megfelelő sürgősségi intézkedéseket tegyenek olyan károsító kimutatása esetén, amely potenciális veszélyt jelent területükre nézve, illetve nem tilthatja az ilyen kimutatás bejelentését. Minden ilyen intézkedést a lehető legrövidebb időn belül értékelni kell annak biztosítására, hogy további fenntartása indokolt. A meghozott intézkedésről haladéktalanul jelentést kell tenni az érintett szerződő feleknek, a Titkárnak, és minden olyan regionális növényvédelmi szervezetnek, amelynek a szerződő fél tagja.

VIII. cikk

Nemzetközi együttműködés

1. A szerződő felek együttműködnek egymással a gyakorlatilag lehetséges legnagyobb mértékben a jelen Egyezmény céljainak megvalósítása érdekében, így különösen:

a) együttműködnek a növényi károsítókra vonatkozó információk cseréjében, különösen az azonnali vagy potenciális veszélyt hordozó károsítók előfordulásának, gócszerű megjelenésének, vagy elterjedésének jelentésében, a Bizottság által esetleg kidolgozott ilyen eljárásokkal összhangban;

b) a gyakorlatilag lehetséges legteljesebb mértékben részt vesznek minden olyan speciális kampányban, amelynek célja az olyan károsítók elleni küzdelem; amelyek súlyosan fenyegethetik növénytermesztésüket, és nemzetközi lépéseket tesznek szükségessé a rendkívüli helyzetek megoldása céljából; és

c) a gyakorlatilag lehetséges mértékben együttműködnek a károsító veszélyességi elemzéshez szükséges szakmai és biológiai információk átadásában.

2. Mindegyik szerződő fél köteles kijelölni egy összekötőt a jelen Egyezmény végrehajtásával kapcsolatos információcsere céljából.

IX. cikk

Regionális növényvédelmi szervezetek

1. A szerződő felek vállalják, hogy együttműködnek egymással a megfelelő területeken működő regionális növényvédelmi szervezetek létrehozásában.

2. A regionális növényvédelmi szervezetek összehangoló szervként működnek az érintett területeken, részt vesznek a jelen Egyezmény céljainak elérésével összefüggő különböző tevékenységekben, és ahol szükséges, információt gyűjtenek és terjesztenek.

3. A regionális növényvédelmi szervezetek együttműködnek a Titkárral az Egyezmény céljainak elérése érdekében, és - ahol szükséges - együttműködnek a Titkárral és a Bizottsággal nemzetközi szabványok kidolgozásában.

4. A Titkár rendszeres szakmai konzultációkat hív össze a regionális növényvédelmi szervezetek képviselőinek részvételével a következő célokból:

a) a növény-egészségügyi intézkedésekre vonatkozó megfelelő nemzetközi szabványok kidolgozásának és alkalmazásának előmozdítása; és

b) a régióközi együttműködés ösztönzése a károsítók elleni védekezésre, valamint terjedésük és/vagy behurcolásuk megakadályozására irányuló összehangolt növény-egészségügyi intézkedések előmozdításában.

X. cikk

Szabványok

1. A szerződő felek vállalják, hogy együttműködnek a nemzetközi szabványok kidolgozásában, a Bizottság által elfogadott eljárásoknak megfelelően.

2. A nemzetközi szabványokat a Bizottság fogadja el.

3. A regionális szabványoknak összhangban kell állniuk a jelen Egyezmény elveivel; az ilyen szabványokat be kell nyújtani a Bizottsághoz annak érdekében, hogy azokat, ha szélesebb körben is alkalmazhatóak, javaslatként figyelembe lehessen venni növény-egészségügyi intézkedésekre vonatkozó nemzetközi szabványok kidolgozásánál.

4. A szerződő felek, ahol szükséges, kötelesek figyelembe venni a nemzetközi szabványokat, amikor a jelen Egyezménnyel összefüggő tevékenységeket végeznek.

XI. cikk

A Növény-egészségügyi Intézkedésekkel foglalkozó Bizottság

1. A szerződő felek hozzájárulnak a Növény-egészségügyi Intézkedésekkel foglalkozó Bizottság felállításához az Egyesült Nemzetek Élelmezési és Mezőgazdasági Szervezetének (FAO) keretei között.

2. A Bizottság feladata, hogy előmozdítsa az Egyezmény céljainak teljes körű megvalósítását, és konkrétan:

a) megvizsgálja a növényvédelem helyzetét a világban, és azokat az intézkedéseket, amelyek szükségesek lehetnek a károsítók nemzetközi terjedésének visszaszorítására, illetve a veszélyeztetett területekre történő behurcolásának megakadályozására;

b) létrehozza és felügyelje a szükséges intézményi megoldásokat és eljárásokat a nemzetközi szabványok kidolgozására és bevezetésére, továbbá bevezesse a nemzetközi szabványokat;

c) kidolgozza a vitás kérdések megoldására szolgáló szabályokat és eljárásokat a XIII. cikknek megfelelően;

d) létrehozza a Bizottság olyan kiegészítő testületeit, amelyek szükségesek lehetnek a funkciók megfelelő megvalósításához;

e) elfogadja az irányelveket a regionális növényvédelmi szervezetek elismeréséhez;

f) együttműködést létesítsen más jelentős nemzetközi szervezetekkel a jelen Egyezményben tárgyalt kérdésekben;

g) elfogadja szükség szerint az Egyezmény végrehajtására vonatkozó ajánlásokat; és

h) lásson el egyéb olyan funkciókat, amelyek szükségesek a jelen Egyezmény céljainak a megvalósításához.

3. A bizottsági tagság minden szerződő fél előtt nyitva áll.

4. Minden szerződő fél egy küldöttel képviseltetheti magát a Bizottság ülésein, akinek kíséretében megjelenhet egy pótképviselő, továbbá szakértők és tanácsadók. A pótképviselő, a szakértők és a tanácsadók részt vehetnek a Bizottság ülésein, de nincs szavazati joguk, kivéve az olyan pótképviselőt, aki kellő felhatalmazással rendelkezik a küldött helyettesítésére.

5. A szerződő felek minden erőfeszítést megtesznek annak érdekében, hogy valamennyi kérdésben konszenzusos megállapodásra jussanak. Ha a konszenzus elérésére irányuló valamennyi erőfeszítés kudarcot vallott és nem sikerült megállapodásra jutni, a döntést végső megoldásként a jelenlevő és szavazó szerződő felek kétharmados többségével lehet meghozni.

6. A FAO olyan tagszervezete, amely szerződő fél, és ennek a tagszervezetnek a tagállamai, amelyek szerződő felek, a FAO Alapszabályának és általános szabályainak megfelelően, mutatis mutandis, gyakorolják a tagsággal járó jogaikat, és teljesítik az azzal járó kötelezettségeiket.

7. A Bizottság szükség szerint elfogadhatja és módosíthatja saját Eljárásrendjét, amely azonban nem állhat ellentétben a jelen Egyezménnyel, vagy a FAO Alapszabályával.

8. A Bizottság elnöke évente összehívja a Bizottság rendes ülésszakát.

9. A Bizottság rendkívüli ülésszakait a Bizottság elnöke hívja össze a tagok legalább egyharmadának kérésére.

10. A Bizottság elnököt és legfeljebb két alelnököt választ, akiknek mindegyike két évig tölti be tisztségét.

XII. cikk

Titkárság

1. A Bizottság Titkárát a FAO Főigazgatója jelöli ki.

2. A Titkár munkáját szükség szerinti létszámú titkárság segíti.

3. A Titkár felelős a Bizottság stratégiájának és tevékenységének megvalósításáért és egyéb olyan funkciók ellátásáért, amelyeket a jelen Egyezmény ruház rá, és erről jelentést tesz a Bizottságnak.

4. A Titkár köteles eljuttatni az érdekeltekhez:

a) a nemzetközi szabványokat valamennyi szerződő félnek, az elfogadástól számított hatvan napon belül;

b) a szerződő felek által a VII. cikk 2. d) bekezdése értelmében közölt belépési állomások listáját valamennyi szerződő félnek;

c) azoknak a vizsgálatköteles károsítóknak a listáját, amelyek bekerülése tilos, vagy amelyekre a VII. cikk 2. i) bekezdése hivatkozik, valamennyi szerződő félnek és regionális növényvédelmi szervezetnek;

d) a szerződő felektől a VII. cikk 2. b) bekezdésében hivatkozott növény-egészségügyi előírásokra, korlátozásokra és tilalmakra vonatkozó információt, továbbá a hivatalos nemzeti növényvédelmi szervezetekről adott leírást, ahogy arra a IV. cikk 4. bekezdése hivatkozik.

5. A Titkár gondoskodik a bizottsági értekezletek dokumentációjának és a nemzetközi szabványoknak a FAO hivatalos nyelveire történő lefordításról.

6. A Titkár együttműködik a regionális növényvédelmi szervezetekkel az Egyezmény céljainak megvalósításában.

XIII. cikk

Vitás kérdések rendezése

1. Ha bármilyen vita merül fel a jelen Egyezmény értelmezésében vagy alkalmazásában, vagy fia valamely szerződő fél úgy véli, hogy egy másik szerződő fél valamely lépése ellentétben áll az utóbbira a jelen Egyezmény V. és VII. cikke értelmében háruló kötelezettségekkel, különösen a területéről származó növények vagy egyéb vizsgálatköteles áruk importjára hozott tilalmak vagy korlátozások megalapozottságát illetően, akkor az érintett szerződő felek a lehető legrövidebb időn belül megbeszélést folytatnak egymás között a vitás kérdések megoldása céljából.

2. Ha a vitás kérdés nem oldható meg az 1. bekezdésben említett eszközökkel, az érintett szerződő fél vagy felek kérhetik a FAO Főigazgatóját, hogy nevezzen ki szakértői bizottságot a vitatott kérdés megvizsgálására, a Bizottság által megállapítható szabályokkal és eljárásokkal összhangban.

3. Ennek a szakértői bizottságnak tagjai az érintett szerződő felek által kijelölt képviselők. A szakértői bizottság megtárgyalja a vitatott kérdést, figyelembe véve minden olyan dokumentumot és egyéb bizonyítékot, amelyet az érintett szerződő felek benyújtanak. A szakértői bizottság jelentést készít a vitatott kérdés szakmai vonatkozásairól a probléma megoldása érdekében. A jelentés elkészítésének és jóváhagyásának a Bizottság által meghatározott szabályokkal és eljárásokkal összhangban kell történnie, és ezt a Főigazgatónak továbbítania kell az érintett szerződő feleknek. A jelentést a kereskedelmi viták megoldásában illetékes nemzetközi szervezet kérésére ez utóbbinak is meg lehet küldeni.

4. A szerződő felek megállapodnak abban, hogy az ilyen szakértői bizottság ajánlásai nem kötelező erejűek ugyan, de a további tárgyalások alapját képezik az érintett szerződő felek számára annak a kérdésnek a megvitatásában, amelyről a véleménykülönbség kialakult.

5. Az érintett szerződő felek közösen viselik a szakértők költségeit.

6. A jelen cikk rendelkezései kiegészítik a kereskedelmi ügyekkel foglalkozó egyéb nemzetközi egyezmények által előírt vitarendezési eljárásokat, de nem csökkenthetik azok követelményeit.

XIV. cikk

A korábbi egyezmények megszűnése és helyettesítése

A jelen Egyezmény megszünteti és helyettesíti a szerződő felek által a Phylloxera vastatrix elleni intézkedésekről hozott 1881. november 3-i nemzetközi Egyezményt, a Bernben 1889. április 15-én aláírt kiegészítő Egyezményt és a növényvédelemről Rómában 1929. április 16-án aláírt nemzetközi Egyezményt.

XV. cikk

Területi alkalmazás

1. Bármely szerződő fél a ratifikálás vagy a csatlakozás időpontjában, vagy bármely későbbi időpontban közölhet a FAO Főigazgatójával olyan nyilatkozatot, amelynek értelmében jelen Egyezmény kiterjed mindazokra a területeire, amelyeknek nemzetközi kapcsolataiért az adott tagállam a felelős, és jelen Egyezmény a nyilatkozatnak a Főigazgató által történt átvételétől számított harmincadik napon lép hatályba a nyilatkozatban meghatározott valamennyi terület vonatkozásában.

2. Minden olyan szerződő fél, amely megküldte a FAO Főigazgatójának a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésének megfelelő nyilatkozatot, bármely időpontban tehet további nyilatkozatot, amely módosítja korábbi nyilatkozatainak területi hatályát vagy megszünteti a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek alkalmazását bármely terület tekintetében. Az ilyen módosítás vagy megszüntetés a nyilatkozatnak a Főigazgató által történt átvételétől számított harmincadik napon lép hatályba.

3. A FAO Főigazgatója tájékoztatja az összes szerződő felet a jelen cikk értelmében kapott minden nyilatkozatról.

XVI. cikk

Kiegészítő megállapodások

1. A szerződő felek az olyan speciális növényvédelmi problémák megoldása céljából, amelyek különös figyelmet vagy intézkedéseket igényelnek, kiegészítő megállapodásokat kötnek. Az ilyen megállapodások vonatkozhatnak meghatározott régiókra, meghatározott károsítókra, meghatározott növényekre és növényi termékekre, a növények és növényi termékek nemzetközi forgalmában alkalmazott konkrét módszerekre, vagy más módon egészíthetik ki a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseit.

2. Minden ilyen kiegészítő megállapodás az után lép hatályba az érintett szerződő felek között, miután azt a szóban forgó kiegészítő megállapodás rendelkezéseinek megfelelően elfogadták.

3. A kiegészítő megállapodásoknak elő kell mozdítaniuk a jelen Egyezmény szándékát és meg kell felelniük a jelen Egyezmény alapelveinek és rendelkezéseinek, továbbá az átláthatóság, a megkülönböztetés-mentesség és a burkolt korlátozás tilalma elveinek, különösen nemzetközi kereskedelmi ügyekben.

XVII. cikk

Ratifikálás és csatlakozás

1. A jelen Egyezményt 1952. május 1-jéig minden állam aláírhatja és azt a lehető legrövidebb időn belül ratifikálnia kell. A ratifikálásról szóló okmányokat a FAO Főigazgatójánál kell letétbe helyezni, aki értesítést küld a letétbe helyezés időpontjáról valamennyi aláíró államnak.

2. Mihelyt jelen Egyezmény a XXII. cikknek megfelelően hatályba lép, nyitva áll a csatlakozásra a nem-aláíró államok és a FAO tagszervezetei számára. A csatlakozást az erről szóló okmánynak a FAO Főigazgatójánál való letétbe helyezésével kell végrehajtani, aki értesíti az összes szerződő felet.

3. Amikor a FAO valamely tagszervezete a jelen Egyezmény szerződő felévé válik, a tagszervezet csatlakozásának időpontjában köteles a FAO Alapszabály II. cikk 7. bekezdésében foglalt rendelkezéseinek megfelelően közölni a FAO Alapszabályának II. cikke 5. bekezdése értelmében az illetékességi nyilatkozathoz csatolt olyan módosításokat vagy pontosításokat, amelyek szükségessé válhatnak a jelen Egyezmény elfogadása következtében. Jelen Egyezmény valamennyi szerződő fele bármely időpontban felkérheti a FAO jelen Egyezményt aláíró tagszervezetét, hogy bocsásson rendelkezésére információt arra vonatkozóan, hogy a szervezet és tagállamai közül melyik felelős a jelen Egyezmény hatáskörébe tartozó valamely vitás ügy elintézéséért. A tagszervezet ésszerű időn belül megadja ezt a tájékoztatást.

XVIII. cikk

Nem-szerződő felek

A szerződő feleknek ösztönözniük kell minden olyan államot vagy FAO tagszervezetet, amely nem aláírója a jelen Egyezménynek a jelen Egyezmény elfogadására, és ösztönözniük kell minden nem-szerződő felet olyan növény-egészségügyi intézkedések alkalmazására, amelyek összhangban vannak a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel, és az annak alapján elfogadott nemzetközi szabványokkal.

XIX. cikk

Nyelvi kérdések

1. A jelen Egyezmény hiteles nyelvei a FAO hivatalos nyelvei.

2. A jelen Egyezmény nem értelmezhető úgy, mint amely arra kötelezné a szerződő feleket, hogy dokumentumokat tegyenek közzé vagy azokról másolatokat készítsenek a szerződő fél nyelvétől különböző nyelveken, az alábbi 3. bekezdésben szereplők kivételével.

3. Az alábbi dokumentumokat el kell készíteni a FAO hivatalos nyelveinek legalább egyikén:

a) a IV. cikk 4. bekezdésének megfelelően közlendő tájékoztatás;

b) a VII. cikk 2. b) bekezdésének megfelelően továbbított dokumentumokra vonatkozó bibliográfiai adatokat tartalmazó mellékelt feljegyzések;

c) a VII. cikk 2. b), d), i) és j) bekezdéseinek megfelelően nyújtott tájékoztatás;

d) a VIII. cikk 1. a) bekezdése szerint közölt tájékoztatásról szóló fontos dokumentumok bibliográfiai adatait és rövid összefoglalását tartalmazó feljegyzés;

e) az összekötőktől kért információk, valamint az ilyen kérésekre adott válaszok, ez azonban nem vonatkozik a csatolt dokumentumokra;

f) a szerződő felek által a Bizottság ülései elé terjesztett bármely dokumentum.

XX. cikk

Szakmai segítségnyújtás

A szerződő felek hozzájárulnak ahhoz, hogy előmozdítják szakmai segítség nyújtását a szerződő felek számára, különösen a fejlődő országok esetében, akár kétoldalú módon, akár pedig az illetékes nemzetközi szervezetek útján azzal a céllal, hogy megkönnyítsék a jelen Egyezmény megvalósítását.

XXI. cikk

Az Egyezmény módosítása

1. A szerződő felek a jelen Egyezmény módosítására vonatkozó javaslataikat a FAO Főigazgatójával közlik.

2. A jelen Egyezmény módosítására vonatkozó minden javaslatot, amelyet a FAO főigazgatója valamely szerződő féltől kap, a Bizottság rendes vagy rendkívüli ülése elé kell terjeszteni jóváhagyás céljából, és ha a módosítás jelentős szakmai változásokkal vagy a szerződő felekre vonatkozó további kötelezettségekkel jár, akkor azt a FAO által összehívott szakértői tanácsadó bizottság elé kell terjeszteni, mielőtt a Bizottság elé kerülne.

3. A jelen Egyezmény javasolt módosításáról szóló értesítést - eltekintve a melléklet módosításaitól - a FAO Főigazgatója legkésőbb abban az időpontban küldi meg a szerződő feleknek, amikor annak a bizottsági ülésnek a napirendjét megküldi, amelyen a szóban forgó kérdést tárgyalni szándékoznak.

4. A jelen Egyezmény minden javasolt módosításához szükség van a Bizottság jóváhagyására, és az attól az időponttól számított harmincadik napon lép hatályba, amelyen azt a szerződő felek kétharmada elfogadta. A jelen cikk szempontjából a FAO valamely tagszervezete által letétbe helyezett okmányt nem lehet az ilyen szervezet tagállamai által letétbe helyezett okmányok kiegészítésének tekinteni.

5. Az olyan módosítások azonban, amelyek új kötelezettségeket rónak a szerződő felekre, csak akkor lépnek életbe az egyes szerződő felek vonatkozásában, ha azok azt elfogadták, mégpedig az ilyen elfogadástól számított harmincadik naptól kezdve. Az új kötelezettségeket tartalmazó módosítások elfogadásáról szóló okmányokat a FAO Főigazgatójánál kell letétbe helyezni, aki tájékoztatja az összes szerződő felet a módosítások elfogadásának beérkezéséről és annak hatálybalépéséről.

6. A jelen Egyezmény Mellékletében szereplő növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány-minta módosítására vonatkozó javaslatokat a Titkárnak kell megküldeni, és azokat a Bizottság tárgyalja mag jóváhagyás céljából. A jelen Egyezmény Mellékletében szereplő növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány-minta elfogadott módosításai kilencven nappal azután lépnek hatályba, hogy az elfogadásról a Titkár értesítette a szerződő feleket.

7. A jelen Egyezmény Mellékletében szereplő növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány-minta módosításától számított legfeljebb tizenkét hónapos időszakban a növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványok korábbi változata is érvényes a jelen Egyezmény céljai szempontjából.

XXII. cikk

Hatálybalépés

Ha a jelen Egyezményt három aláíró állam ratifikálta, az ő vonatkozásukban az Egyezmény hatályba lép. Minden olyan tagállam vagy FAO tagszervezet tekintetében, amely a későbbiekben ratifikálja az Egyezményt vagy csatlakozik ahhoz, az Egyezmény a ratifikálásról vagy csatlakozásról szóló okmány letétbe helyezésének időpontjától lép hatályba,

XXIII. cikk

Az Egyezmény felmondása

1. Bármely szerződő fél bármely időpontban felmondhatja a jelen Egyezményt a FAO Főigazgatójához intézett értesítéssel. A Főigazgató haladéktalanul tájékoztatja valamennyi szerződő felet.

2. A felmondás az értesítésnek a FAO Főigazgatója által történt kézhezvételétől számított egy év elteltével lép hatályba.

Melléklet

Növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány-minta

Sorszám: ........................................

............................... ország

növényvédelmi szervezete

Címzett ország(ok) növényvédelmi szervezete(i): .......................................

I. A szállítmány leírása

Az exportőr neve és címe: ....................................................................................................................

A címzett bejelentett neve és címe: ....................................................................................................

A csomagok száma és leírása: ........................................................................................................

Megkülönböztető jelzések: .................................................................................................................

Származási hely: ............................................................................................................................

Bejelentett szállítóeszköz: ....................................................................................................................

Bejelentett belépési állomás: ..............................................................................................................

A termék bejelentett neve és mennyisége: ..........................................................................................

A növények botanikai neve: ..............................................................................................................

Ezennel igazoljuk, hogy a fentiekben leírt növényeket, növényi termékeket vagy egyéb vizsgálatköteles árukat vizuálisan és/vagy laboratóriumban megvizsgáltuk a megfelelő hatósági eljárások szerint, és azokat mentesnek tekintjük az importáló szerződő fél által meghatározott karantén károsítóktól, továbbá úgy tekintjük, hogy megfelelnek az importáló szerződő fél hatályban levő növény-egészségügyi előírásainak, beleértve a vizsgálatköteles, nem-karantén károsítókra vonatkozó előírásokat is.

A szállítmányt gyakorlatilag más károsítótól is mentesnek tekintjük. 

II. Kiegészítő nyilatkozat

III. Fertőtlenítő kezelés

Időpont: ...................................... Kezelés: ............................. Vegyszer (hatóanyag): .....................

Időtartam és hőmérséklet: ...............................................................................................................

Koncentráció: ................................................................................................................................

További tájékoztatás: .......................................................................................................................

 

 A kibocsátás helyszíne: ...............................................................

 (A szervezet bélyegzője)

 A hatóság képviselőjének neve: ....................................................

 

 Kelt: ...........................................................................................

 

 (Aláírás)

A jelen bizonyítvánnyal kapcsolatban semmilyen pénzügyi felelősség nem hárul a ..... -ra (a növényvédelmi szervezet megnevezése), illetve annak tisztviselőire vagy képviselőire. 

Reexport növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány-minta

Sorszám: ...................................................

.........................................

(a reexportáló szerződő fél)

növényvédelmi szervezete

Címzett szerződő importáló ország(ok) növényvédelmi szervezete(i): ...............................................

I. A szállítmány leírása

Az exportőr neve és címe: .............................................................................................................

A címzett bejelentett neve és címe: .....................................................................................................

A csomagok száma és leírása: .............................................................................................................

Megkülönböztető jelzések: .............................................................................................................

Származási hely: ............................................................................................................................

Bejelentett szállítóeszköz: ..............................................................................................................

Bejelentett belépési állomás: .............................................................................................................

A termék bejelentett neve és mennyisége: ........................................................................................

A növények botanikai neve: ............................................................................................................

Ezennel igazoljuk, hogy a fentiekben leírt növényeket, növényi termékeket vagy egyéb vizsgálatköteles árukat ..... (a reexportáló szerződő fél) országába a ..... (származási szerződő fél) országába a ..... számú növény-egészségügyi bizonyítványt mellékelve importálták, amelynek eredeti példányát [...], hitelesített másolatát [...] csatoljuk a jelen bizonyítványhoz; tanúsítjuk továbbá, hogy a szállítmányt eredeti [...] új [...] csomagolóanyagba tették [...] újracsomagolták [...], és hogy az eredeti növény-egészségügyi bizonyítvány [...] és kiegészítő vizsgálat [...] alapján az importáló szerződő ország jelenleg hatályos növény-egészségügyi követelményeinek megfelel, és hogy a ..... (reexportáló szerződő fél) országában történt tárolás során a rakomány nem fertőződött kártevőkkel vagy kórokozókkal.

II. Kiegészítő nyilatkozat

III. Fertőtlenítő kezelés

Időpont: ...................................... Kezelés: ............................. Vegyszer (hatóanyag): .....................

Időtartam és hőmérséklet: ...............................................................................................................

Koncentráció: ................................................................................................................................

További tájékoztatás: .......................................................................................................................

 

 A kibocsátás helyszíne: ...............................................................

 (A szervezet bélyegzője)

 A hatóság képviselőjének neve: ....................................................

 

 Kelt: ...........................................................................................

 

 (Aláírás)

A jelen bizonyítvánnyal kapcsolatban semmilyen pénzügyi felelősség nem hárul a ............................. -ra (a növényvédelmi szervezet megnevezése), illetve annak tisztviselőire vagy képviselőire. ”

3. § (1) Ez a törvény a kihirdetését követő 8. napon lép hatályba.

(2) E törvény hatálybalépésével egyidejűleg hatályát veszti az Egyesült Nemzetek Élelmezési és Mezőgazdasági Szervezete keretében 1951. évi december hó 6. napján kötött Nemzetközi Növényvédelmi Egyezmény kihirdetéséről szóló 1961. évi 3. törvényerejű rendelet.

(3) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a földművelésügyi és vidékfejlesztési miniszter gondoskodik.