2003. évi LXIX. törvény

a Magyar Köztársaság és Kanada között a szociális biztonságról szóló, 2002. március 4-én, Budapesten aláírt Egyezmény kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés a Magyar Köztársaság és Kanada között a szociális biztonságról szóló, 2002. március 4-én, Budapesten aláírt Egyezményt (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

(A megerősítésről szóló utolsó értesítésre 2003. június 2-án került sor. Az Egyezmény 2003. október 1-jén lép hatályba.)

2. § Az Egyezmény hiteles angol, francia és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„Agreement on social security between Canada and the Republic of Hungary

Canada

and

the Republic of Hungary,

hereinafter referred to as «the Contracting Parties»,

resolved to co-operate in the field of social security,

have decided to conclude an agreement for this purpose, and

have agreed as follows:

Part I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article I

Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Agreement:

«benefit» means, as regards a Contracting Party, any cash benefit for which provision is made in the legislation of that Contracting Party and includes any supplements or increases applicable to such a cash benefit;

«competent authority» means, as regards a Contracting Party, the Minister or Ministers responsible for the legislation of that Contracting Party;

«competent institution» means, as regards Canada, the competent authority; and,

as regards the Republic of Hungary, the institution or agency responsible for the application of the legislation of the Republic of Hungary;

«creditable period» means:

as regards Canada, a period of contributions or residence used to acquire the right to a benefit under the legislation of Canada, and includes a period during which a disability pension is payable under the Canada Pension Plan; and,

as regards the Republic of Hungary, a period of contributions under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary, or a period deemed equivalent to, or considered as, a period of contributions under that legislation;

«gainful activity» means:

as regards Canada, pensionable employment or any activity which results in self-employed earnings, as those terms are defined under the Canada Pension Plan; and

as regards the Republic of Hungary, any activity whose objective is to generate income and which comes within the scope of the legislation of the Republic of Hungary;

«government employment» means:

as regards Canada, employment by the Government of Canada, including employment as a member of the Canadian Forces or the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, or employment by the government or municipal corporation of a province or territory of Canada; and

as regards the Republic of Hungary, employment by state or publicly financed institutions, including employment as a civil servant, a public employee, or a career member of the armed forces, of bodies maintaining public order or of civilian national security services, or employment on the basis of a legal relationship in a court of law, in a body of judicial administration or in the office of a public prosecutor;

«legislation» means, as regards a Contracting Party, the legislation specified in Article II(1) with respect to that Contracting Party.

2. Any term not defined in this Article has the meaning assigned to it in the applicable legislation.

Article II

Legislation to Which the Agreement Applies

1. This Agreement shall apply to the following legislation:

a) with respect to Canada:

(i) the Old Age Security Act and the regulations made thereunder, and

(ii) the Canada Pension Plan and the regulations made thereunder;

b) with respect to the Republic of Hungary:

(i) the legislation concerning the payment of social insurance contributions, and

(ii) the legislation concerning social insurance pensions.

2. Subject to paragraph 3, this Agreement shall also apply to laws and regulations which amend, supplement, consolidate or supersede the legislation specified in paragraph 1.

3. This Agreement shall further apply to laws and regulations which extend the legislation of a Contracting Party to new categories of beneficiaries or to new 4 benefits unless an objection on the part of that Contracting Party has been communicated to the other Contracting Party not later than 3 months following the entry into force of such laws and regulations.

Article III

Persons to Whom the Agreement Applies

This Agreement shall apply to:

a) any person who is or who has been subject to the legislation of one or both of the Contracting Parties, and

b) other persons to the extent they derive rights under the applicable legislation from persons described in sub-paragraph a).

Article IV

Equality of Treatment

In the application of the legislation of a Contracting Party, any person described in Article III shall have the same rights and obligations under that legislation as the citizens of that Contracting Party.

Article V

Export of Benefits

1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, benefits payable under the legislation of a Contracting Party to any person described in Article III, including benefits acquired by virtue of this Agreement, shall not be subject to any reduction, modification, suspension, cancellation or confiscation by reason only of the fact that the person resides in the territory of the other Contracting Party, and these benefits shall be paid when that person is in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

2. Benefits payable under this Agreement to a person described in Article III shall be paid when that person is in the territory of a third State.

3. As regards the Republic of Hungary, this Article shall not apply to benefits payable by virtue of agreements concluded between the Republic of Hungary and third States that are based on the territorial principle.

Part II

PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE APPLICABLE LEGISLATION

Article VI

General Rule

Subject to Articles VII to X, a person who is engaged in a gainful activity in the territory of a Contracting Party shall, in respect of that activity, be subject only to the legislation of that Contracting Party.

Article VII

Detachments

1. If a person who is subject to the legislation of a Contracting Party and who is employed by an employer having a place of business in the territory of that Contracting Party is sent, in the course of that employment, to work in the territory of the other Contracting Party, that person shall, in respect of that work, be subject only to the legislation of the first Contracting Party as though that work was performed in its territory.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to a detachment of more than 60 months without the prior consent of the competent authorities of both Contracting Parties or their delegated institutions or agencies.

Article VIII

Self-employment

1. Article VII(1) shall apply, by analogy, to a self-employed person who ordinarily resides in the territory of a Contracting Party and who carries out self-employed activities in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

2. Where, through the application of paragraph 1, a self-employed person would not be required to contribute under the legislation of either of the Contracting Parties in respect of his or her self-employed activities, the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties or their delegated institutions or agencies shall, by common agreement, determine to which legislation that person will be subject.

Article IX

Government Employment

1. Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement, the provisions regarding social security of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April 1961 and the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 24 April 1963 shall continue to apply.

2. A person engaged in government employment for a Contracting Party who is posted to work in the territory of the other Contracting Party shall, in respect of that employment, be subject only to the legislation of the first Contracting Party.

3. Except as provided in paragraphs 1 and 2, a person who resides in the territory of a Contracting Party and who is engaged therein in government employment for the other Contracting Party shall, in respect of that employment, be subject only to the legislation of the first Contracting Party. However, if that person has, prior to the start of that employment, made contributions under the legislation of the employing Contracting Party, he or she may, within 6 months of the start of that employment or the entry into force of this Agreement, whichever is later, elect to be subject only to the legislation of the latter Contracting Party.

Article X

Exceptions

The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties or their delegated institutions or agencies may, by common agreement, make exceptions to the provisions of Articles VI through IX:

a) on the joint request of an employed person and his or her employer, or on the request of a self-employed person, with respect to that person, or

b) with respect to any category of persons.

Article XI

Definition of Certain Periods of Residence with Respect to the Legislation of Canada

1. For the purpose of calculating the amount of benefits under the Old Age Security Act:

a) if a person is subject to the Canada Pension Plan or to the comprehensive pension plan of a province of Canada during any period of presence or residence in the Republic of Hungary, that period shall be considered as a period of residence in Canada for that person as well as for that person’s spouse or common-law partner and dependants who reside with him or her and who are not subject to the legislation of the Republic of Hungary by reason of employment or self-employment;

b) if a person is subject to the legislation of the Republic of Hungary during any period of presence or residence in Canada, that period shall not be considered as a period of residence in Canada for that person and for that person’s spouse or common-law partner and dependants who reside with him or her and who are not subject to the Canada Pension Plan or to the comprehensive pension plan of a province of Canada by reason of employment or self-employment.

2. In the application of paragraph 1:

a) a person shall be considered to be subject to the Canada Pension Plan or to the comprehensive pension plan of a province of Canada during a period of presence or residence in the Republic of Hungary only if that person makes contributions pursuant to the plan concerned during that period by reason of employment or self-employment;

b) a person shall be considered to be subject to the legislation of the Republic of Hungary during a period of presence or residence in Canada only if that person makes compulsory contributions pursuant to that legislation during that period by reason of employment or selfemployment.

Part III

PROVISIONS CONCERNING BENEFITS

Chapter 1

TOTALIZING

Article XII

Periods under the Legislation of Canada and the Republic of Hungary

1. Where the legislation of a Contracting Party makes the acquisition, maintenance or recovery of eligibility for a benefit conditional upon the accumulation of creditable periods, and where a person is not eligible for a benefit because he or she has not accumulated sufficient creditable periods under that legislation to be eligible for that benefit, the competent institution of that Contracting Party, in determining the eligibility of that person for that benefit, shall take into account creditable periods accumulated under the legislation of the other Contracting Party as specified in paragraphs 2 through 5, provided that the periods do not overlap.

2. a) For purposes of determining eligibility for a benefit under the Old Age Security Act of Canada, a creditable period under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary shall be considered as a period of residence in the territory of Canada;

b) For purposes of determining eligibility for a benefit under the Canada Pension Plan, a calendar year including at least 90 days which are creditable periods under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary shall be considered as a year which is creditable under the Canada Pension Plan.

3. For purposes of determining eligibility for an old age benefit under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary;

a) a calendar year which is a creditable period under the Canada Pension Plan shall be considered as a creditable period of 365 days under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary;

b) if the periods described in sub-paragraph a) are not sufficient to establish eligibility for a benefit, a day which is a creditable period under the Old Age Security Act of Canada and which does not overlap with a creditable period under the Canada Pension Plan shall be considered as a day which is a creditable period under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary.

4. For purposes of determining eligibility for a disability benefit under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary, a calendar year which is a creditable period under the Canada Pension Plan shall be considered as a creditable period of 365 days under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary.

5. For purposes of determining eligibility for a benefit under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary for a person described in Article III b), paragraph 3 or 4, as appropriate, shall apply.

Article XIII

Periods under the Legislation of a Third State

1. If a person is not eligible for a benefit on the basis of the creditable periods under the legislation of the Contracting Parties, totalized as provided in Article XII, the eligibility of that person for that benefit shall be determined by totalizing these periods and creditable periods accumulated under the legislation of a third State with which both Contracting Parties are bound by social security instruments which provide for the totalizing of periods.

2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to creditable periods accumulated under the legislation of a third State with which the Republic of Hungary has concluded an agreement based on the territorial principle.

Article XIV

Minimum Period to be Totalized

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, if the total duration of the creditable periods accumulated by a person under the legislation of a Contracting Party is less than one year and if, taking into account only those periods, no right to a benefit exists under the legislation of that Contracting Party, the competent institution of that Contracting Party shall not be required to pay a benefit to that person in respect of those periods by virtue of this Agreement.

Chapter 2

BENEFITS UNDER THE LEGISLATION OF CANADA

Article XV

Benefits under the Old Age Security Act

1. If a person is eligible for an Old Age Security pension or an allowance solely through the application of the totalizing provisions of Chapter 1, the competent institution of Canada shall calculate the amount of the pension or allowance payable to that person in conformity with the provisions of the Old Age Security Act governing the payment of a partial pension or an allowance, exclusively on the basis of the periods of residence in Canada which may be considered under that Act.

2. Paragraph 1 shall also apply to a person outside Canada who would be eligible for a full pension in Canada but who has not resided in Canada for the minimum period required by the Old Age Security Act for the payment of a pension outside Canada.

3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement:

a) an Old Age Security pension shall be paid to a person who is outside Canada only if that person’s periods of residence, when totalized as provided in Chapter 1, are at least equal to the minimum period of residence in Canada required by the Old Age Security Act for the payment of a pension outside Canada;

b) an allowance and a guaranteed income supplement shall be paid to a person who is outside Canada only to the extent permitted by the Old Age Security Act.

Article XVI

Benefits under the Canada Pension Plan

If a person is eligible for a benefit solely through the application of the totalizing provisions of Chapter 1, the competent institution of Canada shall calculate the amount of benefit payable to that person in the following manner:

a) the earnings-related portion of the benefit shall be determined in conformity with the provisions of the Canada Pension Plan, exclusively on the basis of the pensionable earnings under that Plan;

b) the flat-rate portion of the benefit shall be determined by multiplying:

(i) the amount of the flat-rate portion of the benefit determined in conformity with the provisions of the Canada Pension Plan

by

(ii) the fraction which represents the ratio of the periods of contributions to the Canada Pension Plan in relation to the minimum qualifying period required under that Plan to establish eligibility for that benefit, but in no case shall that fraction exceed the value of one.

Chapter 3

BENEFITS UNDER THE LEGISLATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF HUNGARY

Article XVII

Calculating the Amount of Benefit Payable

1. If, under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary, eligibility for a benefit can be established solely through the application of the totalizing provisions of Chapter 1, the competent institution of the Republic of Hungary:

a) shall calculate the theoretical amount of the benefit which would be paid if the totalized creditable periods accumulated under the legislation of both Contracting Parties had been accumulated under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary alone; and

b) on the basis of the theoretical amount calculated in accordance with sub-paragraph a), shall determine the actual amount of benefit payable by applying the ratio of the length of the creditable periods accumulated under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary to the total creditable periods accumulated under the legislation of both Contracting Parties.

2. For purposes of calculating the amount of a benefit through the application of paragraph 1, only income earned under the legislation of the Republic of Hungary and contributions paid under that legislation shall be taken into account.

Part IV

ADMINISTRATIVE AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Article XVIII

Administrative Arrangement

1. The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall establish, by means of an administrative arrangement, the measures necessary for the application of this Agreement.

2. The liaison agencies of the Contracting Parties shall be designated in that arrangement.

Article XIX

Mutual Assistance

1. The competent authorities and institutions responsible for the application of this Agreement:

a) shall lend their good offices and furnish assistance to one another for the purpose of determining eligibility for, or the amount of, any benefit under this Agreement, or under the legislation to which this Agreement applies, as if the matter involved the application of their own legislation;

b) shall communicate to each other, as soon as possible, all information about the measures taken by them for the application of this Agreement or about changes in their respective legislation in so far as these changes affect the application of this Agreement.

2. Subject to paragraph 3 and to any provision contained in an administrative arrangement concluded pursuant to Article XVIII for the reimbursement of certain types of expenses, the assistance referred to in sub-paragraph 1a) shall be provided free of charge.

3. If the competent institution of a Contracting Party requires that a claimant or a beneficiary who resides in the territory of the other Contracting Party undergo a medical examination, the competent institution of the latter Contracting Party, at the request of the competent institution of the first Contracting Party, shall make arrangements for carrying out this examination. If the medical examination is exclusively for the use of the institution which requests it, that competent institution shall reimburse the competent institution of the other Contracting Party for the costs of the examination. However, if the medical examination is for the use of both competent institutions, there shall be no reimbursement of costs.

Article XX

Transmission and Protection of Personal Information

1. The competent authorities and institutions of a Contracting Party shall, in accordance with:

a) the legislation of that Contracting Party, and

b) this Agreement or any arrangement concluded pursuant to Article XVIII for the implementation of this Agreement, transmit to the competent authorities and institutions of the other Contracting Party any information in their possession about an individual required for the application of this Agreement or of the legislation to which this Agreement applies.

2. Any information about an individual transmitted under paragraph 1 by a competent authority or institution of a Contracting Party to a competent authority or institution of the other Contracting Party shall be protected in each Contracting Party in accordance with its legislation and the following provisions:

a) The competent authority or institution of the Contracting Party to which the information is transmitted shall treat that information as confidential and shall effectively protect it against unauthorized access, unauthorized alterations and unauthorized disclosure in accordance with the legislation of that Contracting Party.

b) The competent authority or institution of the Contracting Party to which the information is transmitted may use that information, and may disclose it to other institutions and agencies in that Contracting Party, for the purposes of implementing this Agreement or the legislation of that Contracting Party. The information may be put to other uses and may be disclosed to other bodies only to the extent specifically permitted under the legislation of that Contracting Party. The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall inform each other about all amendments to their legislation regarding the protection of personal information and, in particular, additional purposes for which such information may be used or disclosed to other bodies. The Contracting Party whose legislation has been amended shall, at the request of the other Contracting Party, enter into negotiations to amend or supplement this Agreement, as may be required.

c) In individual cases, the competent authority or institution to which the information is transmitted shall, at the request of the competent authority or institution which has transmitted that information, inform the latter of the use to which that information has been put and the outcome thereof.

d) The individual concerned shall, on request to the authority or institution of either Contracting Party, have the right to be informed of the information which has been transmitted, and the purpose for which that information has been requested or transmitted, as the case may be.

e) The competent authority or institution which transmits the information shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the information is accurate and is strictly limited to that absolutely necessary for the purpose of the transmission. If it becomes evident that incorrect information or information whose transmission is prohibited under the legislation of the transmitting Party was transmitted, the competent authority or institution which has received the information must be immediately notified of this fact and it shall immediately correct incorrect information. It shall also 13 delete any transmitted information whose transmission is prohibited unless that information is required to combat abuse or to prosecute fraud in the context of the legislation which it administers or other similar offences.

f) The competent authority or institution of the Contracting Party to which the information is transmitted shall delete that information in accordance with the legislation of that Contracting Party.

Article XXI

Exemption or Reduction of Taxes, Dues, Fees and Charges

1. Any exemption from or reduction of taxes, legal dues, consular fees and administrative charges for which provision is made in the legislation of a Contracting Party in connection with the issuing of any certificate or document required to be produced for the application of that legislation shall be extended to certificates or documents required to be produced for the application of the legislation of the other Contracting Party.

2. Any documents of an official nature required to be produced for the application of this Agreement shall be exempt from any authentication by diplomatic or consular authorities and similar formality.

Article XXII

Language of Communication

For the application of this Agreement, the competent authorities and institutions of the Contracting Parties may communicate directly with one another in any official language of either Contracting Party.

Article XXIII

Submitting a Claim, Notice or Appeal

1. Claims, notices and appeals concerning eligibility for, or the amount of, a benefit under the legislation of a Contracting Party which should, for the purposes of that legislation, have been presented within a prescribed period to a competent authority or institution of that Contracting Party, but which are presented within the same period to an authority or institution of the other Contracting Party, shall be treated as if they had been presented to the competent authority or institution of the first Contracting Party. The date of presentation of claims, notices and appeals to the authority or institution of the other Contracting Party shall be deemed to be the date of their presentation to the competent authority or institution of the first Contracting Party.

2. Subject to the second sentence of this paragraph, a claim for a benefit under the legislation of a Contracting Party made after the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall be deemed to be a claim for the corresponding benefit under the legislation of the other Contracting Party, provided that the applicant at the time of application:

a) requests that it be considered an application under the legislation of the other Contracting Party, or

b) provides information indicating that creditable periods have been completed under the legislation of the other Contracting Party.

The preceding sentence shall not apply if the applicant requests that his or her claim to the benefit under the legislation of the other Contracting Party be delayed.

3. In any case to which paragraph 1 or 2 applies, the authority or institution to which the claim, notice or appeal has been submitted shall transmit it without delay to the authority or institution of the other Contracting Party.

Article XXIV

Payment of Benefits

1. The competent institution of a Contracting Party shall discharge its obligations under this Agreement in the currency of that Contracting Party.

2. Benefits shall be paid to beneficiaries free from any deduction for administrative expenses that may be incurred in paying the benefits.

3. In the event that a Contracting Party imposes currency controls or other similar measures that restrict payments, remittances or transfers of funds or financial instruments to persons who are outside its territory, that Contracting Party shall, without delay, take suitable measures to ensure the payment of any amount that must be paid in accordance with this Agreement to persons described in Article III who reside in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Article XXV

Resolution of Difficulties

1. The competent institutions of the Contracting Parties shall resolve, to the extent possible, any difficulties which arise in interpreting or applying this Agreement according to its spirit and fundamental principles. If the competent institutions have not resolved the difficulty, the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall do so.

2. The Contracting Parties shall consult promptly at the request of either Contracting Party concerning matters which have not been resolved by the competent institutions and authorities in accordance with paragraph 1.

3. Any dispute between the Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation of this Agreement which has not been resolved or settled by consultation in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 shall, at the request of either Contracting Party, be submitted to arbitration by an arbitral tribunal.

4. Unless the Contracting Parties mutually determine otherwise, the arbitral tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators, of whom each Contracting Party shall appoint one within two months from the date of receipt of the request for arbitration, and the two arbitrators so appointed shall appoint, within two months after the last notice of appointment, the third who shall act as president; provided that if either Contracting Party fails to appoint its arbitrator or if the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree about the third, the competent authority of the other Contracting Party shall invite the President of the International Court of Justice to appoint the arbitrator of the first Contracting Party or the two appointed arbitrators shall invite the President of the International Court of Justice to appoint the president of the arbitral tribunal.

5. If the President of the International Court of Justice is a citizen of either Contracting Party, the function of appointment shall be transferred to the Vicepresident or the next most senior member of the Court who is not a citizen of either Contracting Party.

6. The arbitral tribunal shall determine its own procedures, but it shall reach its decisions by a majority of votes.

7. The decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding.

Article XXVI

Understandings with a Province of Canada

The relevant authority of the Republic of Hungary and a province of Canada may conclude understandings concerning any social security matter within provincial jurisdiction in Canada in so far as those understandings are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

Part V

TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article XXVII

Transitional Provisions

1. Any creditable period completed before the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall be taken into account for the purpose of determining the right to a benefit under this Agreement and its amount.

2. No provision of this Agreement shall confer any right to receive payment of a benefit for a period before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

3. Subject to paragraph 2, a benefit, other than a lump sum payment, shall be paid under this Agreement in respect of events which happened before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article XXVIII

Duration and Termination

1. This Agreement shall remain in force without any limitation on its duration. It may be terminated at any time by either Contracting Party giving 12 months’ notice in writing to the other Contracting Party.

2. In the event of the termination of this Agreement, any right acquired by a person in accordance with its provisions shall be maintained and negotiations shall take place for the settlement of any rights then in course of acquisition by virtue of those provisions.

Article XXIX

Entry into Force

This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the fourth month following the final day of the month in which the Contracting Parties shall have exchanged written notices through the diplomatic channel confirming that their respective legal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been completed. The date of the exchange of the written notices shall be the date of the delivery of the last notice.

In witness whereof, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have signed this Agreement.

Done in duplicate at Budapest, this fourth day of March, 2002, in the English, French and Hungarian languages, each text being equally authentic.”

„Accord sur la sécurité sociale entre le Canada et la République de Hongrie

Le Canada

et

la Républiquc de Hongrie,

ci-aprés appelés «les Parties contractantes»,

résolus á coopérer dans le domaine de la sécurité sociale,

ont décidé de conclure un Accord á cette fin, et

sont convenus des dispositions suivantes:

Titre I

DISPOSITIONS GÉNÉRALES

Article I

Définitions

1. Aux fins du présent Accord:

«activité rémunératrice» désigne:

pour le Canada, tout emploi ouvrant droit á pension ou toute activité qui génére des gains de travail autonome, comme ceux définis dans le Régime de pensions du Canada; et

pour la République de Hongrie, toute activité dont l’objectif est de générer un revenu et qui reléve de la législation de la République de Hongrie;

«autorité compétente» désigne, pour une Partié contractante, le ministre ou les ministres chargés de l’application de la législation de ladite Partié contractante;

«emploi au gouvernement» désigne:

pour le Canada, tout emploi au sein du gouvernement du Canada, y compris é titre de membre des Forces canadiennes ou de la Gendarmerie royale du Canada ou tout emploi au sein du gouvernement ou d’une administration municipale d’une province ou d’un territoire du Canada; et

pour la République de Hongrie, tout emploi par l’État ou par des institutions financées publiquement, incluant tout emploi é titre de fonctionnaire ou d’employé de l’état ou de membre des Forces armées, d’organisme du maintien de l’ordre public ou des services de sécurité nationale civile ou tout emploi sur la base d’un rapport légal dans une cour de justice, dans un organisme de gestion juridique ou dans le bureau du ministére public;

«institution compétente» désigne:

pour le Canada, l’autorité compétente; et

pour la République de Hongrie, l’institution ou l’organisme responsable de l’application de la législation de la République de Hongrie;

«législation» désigne, á l’égard d’une Partie contractante, la législation visée á l’article II(1) de ladite Partie contractante;

«période admissible» désigne:

pour le Canada, toute période de cotisation ou de résidence ouvrant droit á une prestation aux termes de la législation du Canada et comprend toute période ou une pension d’invalidité est payable aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada; et

pour la République de Hongrie, toute période de cotisation aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie, ou toute période réputée équivalente á une période de cotisation aux termes de ladite législation ou considérée comme telle;

«prestation» désigne, pour une Partie contractante, toute prestation en espéces prévue par la législation de ladite Partie contractante, y compris toute majoration ou tout supplément qui y sont applicables.

2. Tout terme non défini au présent article a le sens qui lui est attribué par la législation applicable.

Article II

Législation á laquelle l’Accord s’applique

1. Le présent Accord s’applique a la législation suivante:

a) pour le Canada:

(i) la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse et les réglemente qui en découlent, et

(ii) le Régime de pensions du Canada et les réglements qui en découlent;

b) pour la République de Hongrie:

(i) la législation concernant le paiement des cotisations d’assurance sociale, et

(ii) la législation concernant les pensions d’assurance sociale.

2. Sous réserve des dispositions du paragraphe 3, le présent Accord s’applique également aux lois et aux réglements qui modifient, complétent, unifient ou remplacent la législation visée au paragraphe 1.

3. Le présent Accord s’applique de plus aux lois et aux réglements qui étendent la législation d’une Partie contractante á de nouvelles catégories de bénéficiaires ou á de nouvelles prestations sauf objection de ladite Partie contractante communiquée á l’autre Partie contractante au plus tard 3 mois suivant l’entrée en vigueur desdites lois et desdits réglements.

Article III

Personnes á qui l’Accord s’applique

Le présent Accord s’applique á:

a) toute personne qui est ou qui a été assujettie á la législation de l’une ou des deux Parties contractantes; et

b) d’autres personnes dans la mesure oú leurs droits dérivent de celui de la personne décrite á l’alinéa a) aux termes de la législation applicable.

Article IV

Égalité de traitement

Á l’égard de l’application de la législation d’une Partie contractante, toute personne décrite á l’article III a les mémes droits et obligations aux termes de ladite législation que les citoyens de cette Partie contractante.

Article V

Versement des prestations á l’étranger

1. Sauf dispositions contraires du présent Accord, toute prestation payable aux termes de la législation d’une Partie contractante á toute personne visée á l’article III, y compris toute prestation acquise aux termes du présent Accord, ne peut subir aucune réduction, ni modification, ni suspension, ni suppression, ni confiscation du seul fait que ladite personne réside sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante, et ladite prestation est versée lorsque ladite personne est sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante.

2. Toute prestation payable aux termes du présent Accord á une personne décrite á l’article III est versée lorsque ladite personne est sur le territoire d’un état tiers.

3. Pour la République de Hongrie, le présent article ne s’applique pas aux prestations payables en vertu d’accords conclus entre la République de Hongrie et des états tiers qui sont fondés sur le principe territorial.

Titre II

DISPOSITIONS RELATIVES Á LA LÉGISLATION APPLICABLE

Article VI

Régle générale

Sous réserve des articles VII á X, toute personne qui exerce une activité rémunératrice sur le territoire d’une Partie contractante n’est assujettie, relativement á cette activité, qu’á la législation de ladite Partie contractante.

Article VII

Détachements

1. Si une personne qui est assujettie á la législation d’une Partie contractante et qui travaille pour un employeur ayant un lieu d’affaires dans le territoire de ladite Partie contractante est affectée, dans le cours de son emploi, sur le territoire d’une autre Partie contractante, ladite personne est, á l’égard de ce travail, assujettie uniquement á la législation de la premiére Partie contractante comme si ce travail était effectué sur son territoire.

2. Le paragraphe 1 ne s’applique pas a un détachement de plus de 60 mois sans l’approbation préalable des autorités compétentes des deux Parties contractantes ou de leurs institutions ou organismes délégués.

Article VIII

Travail autonome

1. L’article VII(1) s’applique, par analogie, aux travailleurs autonomes qui résident habituellement sur le territoire d’une Partie contractante et qui exercent leurs activités de travailleurs autonomes sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante.

2. En vertu de l’application du paragraphe 1, lorsqu’un travailleur autonome n’est pas tenu de verser des cotisations aux termes de la législation de l’une ou l’autre des Parties contractantes á l’égard de son travail autonome, les autorités compétentes des Parties contractantes ou leurs institutions ou organismes délégués déterminent, d’un commun accord, la législation á laquelle est assujettie le travailleur.

Article IX

Emploi au gouvernement

1. Nonobstant toute disposition du présent Accord, les dispositions concernant la sécurité sociale de la Convention de Vienne sur les relations diplomatiques du 18 avril 1961 et de la Convention de Vienne sur les relations consulaires du 24 avril 1963 continuent de s’appliquer.

2. Une personne qui occupe un emploi au sein du gouvernement d’une Partie contractante qui est affectée á un poste sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante est, á l’égard de cet emploi, assujettie uniquement á la législation de la premiére Partie contractante.

3. Á moins d’indication contraire aux paragraphes 1 et 2, une personne qui réside sur le territoire d’une Partie contractante et qui occupe un emploi au sein du gouvernement de l’autre Partie contractante est, á l’égard de cet emploi, assujettie uniquement á la législation de la premiére Partie contractante. Toutefois, si ladite personne a versé des cotisations aux termes de la législation de la Partie contractante employeur, avant le début de cet emploi, elle peut choisir d’éetre assujettie uniquement á la législation de la derniére Partie contractante selon la derniére des éventualités suivantes á survenir: dans les six mois du début de cet emploi ou de l’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord.

Article X

Exceptions

Les autorités compétentes des Parties contractantes ou leurs institutions ou organismes délégués peuvent, d’un commun accord, faire exception aux dispositions des articles VI á IX:

a) á la demande commune d’un travailleur salarié et de son employeur ou á la demande d’un travailleur autonome, á l’égard de ladite personne; ou

b) á l’égard de toute catégorie de personnes.

Article XI

Définition de certaines périodes de résidence á l’égard de la législation du Canada

1. Aux fins du calcul du montant des prestations aux termes de la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse:

a) si une personne est assujettie au Régime de pensions du Canada ou au régime général de pensions d’une province du Canada pendant une période quelconque de présence ou de résidence en République de Hongrie, ladite période est considérée comme une période de résidence au Canada relativement á ladite personne, ainsi qu’á son époux(se) ou son conjoint de fait et aux personnes á sa charge qui demcurent avec elle et qui ne sont pas assujettis á la législation de la République de Hongrie en raison d’un emploi ou d’un travail autonome;

b) si une personne est assujettie á la législation de la République de Hongrie pendant une période quelconque de présence ou de résidence au Canada, ladite période n’est pas considérée comme une période de résidence au Canada relativement á ladite personne, ainsi qu’á son époux(se) ou á son conjoint de fait et aux personnes á sa charge qui demeurent avec elle et qui ne sont pas assujettis au Régime de pensions du Canada ou au régime général de pensions d’une province du Canada en raison d’un emploi ou d’un travail autonome.

2. Aux fins de l’application du paragraphe 1:

a) une personne est considérée assujettie au Régime de pensions du Canada ou au régime général de pensions d’une province du Canada pendant une période de présence ou de résidence en République de Hongrie uniquement si ladite personne verse des cotisations aux termes du régime concerné pendant ladite période en raison d’un emploi ou d’un travail autonome;

b) une personne est considérée assujettie á la législation de la République de Hongrie pendant une période de présence ou de résidence au Canada uniquement si ladite personne verse des cotisations obligatoires aux termes de ladite législation pendant ladite période en raison d’un emploi ou d’un travail autonome.

Titre III

DISPOSITIONS CONCERNANT LES PRESTATIONS

Section 1

TOTALISATION

Article XII

Périodes aux termes de la législation du Canada et de la République de Hongrie

1. Lorsque la législation d’une des Parties contractantes rend l’acquisition, le maintien ou la récupération de l’admissibilité á une prestation conditionnelle a l’accumulation des périodes admissibles, et lorsqu’une personne n’est pas admissiblé á une prestation parce qu’elle n’a pas accumulé suffisamment de périodes admissibles aux termes de ladite législation pour étre admissible á ladite préstation, l’institution compétente de ladite Partie contractante tient compte des périodes admissibles accumulées aux termes de la législation de l’autre Partie contractante pour déterminer l’admissibilité de ladite personne á ladite prestation comme il est précisé aux paragraphes 2 á 5, pour autant que lesdites périodes ne se superposent pas.

2. a) Aux fins de déterminer le droit á une prestation aux termes de la Loi sur la sécurité de la vicillesse du Canada, une période admissible aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie est considérée comme une période de résidence sur le territoire du Canada;

b) Aux fins de déterminer le droit á une prestation aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada, une année civile comptant au moins 90 jours qui sont des périodes admissibles aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie est considérée comme une année admissible aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada.

3. Aux fins de déterminer le droit á une prestation de vicillesse aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie:

a) une année civile qui est une période admissible aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada est considérée comme une période admissible de 365 jours aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie;

b) si les périodes décrites á l’alinéa a) ne sont pas suffisantes pour établir l’admissibilité á une prestation, un jour qui est une période admissible aux termes de la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse du Canada et qui ne se superpose pas á une période admissible aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada est considéré comme un jour admissible aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie.

4. Aux fins de déterminer le droit á une prestation d’invalidité aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie, une année civile qui est une période admissible aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada est considérée comme une période admissible de 365 jours aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie.

5. Aux fins de déterminer l’admissibilité á une préstation aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie pour une personne décrite á l’article IIIb), le paragraphe 3 ou 4, selon le cas, s’applique.

Article XIII

Périodes aux termes de la législation d’un état tiers

1. Si une personne n’a pas droit á une prestation en fonction des périodes admissibles aux termes de la législation des Parties contractantes, totalisées conformément á l’article XII, le droit de ladite personne á ladite prestation est déterminé par la totalisation desdites périodes et des périodes admissibles aux termes de la législation d’un état tiers avec lequel les Parties contractantes sont liées par des instruments de sécurité sociale prévoyant la totalisation de périodes.

2. Le paragraphe 1 ne s’applique pas aux périodes admissibles accumulées aux termes de la législation d’un état tiers avec lequel la République de Hongrie a conclu un Accord fondé sur le principe territorial.

Article XIV

Période minimale á totaliser

Nonobstant toute autre disposition du présent Accord, si la durée totale des périodes admissibles accumulées par une personne aux termes de la législation d’une Partie contractante est inférieure á une année, et si, compte tenu de ces seules périodes, le droit á une prestation n’est pas acquis aux termes de la législation de ladite Partie contractante, l’institution compétente de ladite Partie contractante n’est pas tenue, aux termes du présent Accord, d’accorder des prestations a ladite personne au titre desdites périodes.

Section 2

PRESTATIONS AUX TERMES DE LA LÉGISLATION DU CANADA

Article XV

Prestations aux termes de la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse

1. Si une personne a droit á une pension de la Sécurité de la vieillesse ou une allocation uniquement á la suite de l’application des dispositions relatives á la totalisation énoncées á la section 1, l’institution compétente du Canada détermine le montant de la pension ou de l’allocation payable á ladite personne conformément aux dispositions de la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse qui régissent le versement de la pension partielle ou de l’allocation, uniquement en fonction des périodes de résidence au Canada admissibles aux termes de ladite Loi.

2. Les dispositions du paragraphe 1 s’appliquent également á une personne qui est hors du Canada et qui a droit á une pension intégrale au Canada, mais qui n’a pas résidé au Canada pendant la période de résidence minimale exigée par la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse pour le versement d’une pension hors du Canada.

3. Nonobstant toute autre disposition du present Accord:

a) une pension de la Sécurité de la vieillesse est versée á une personne qui est hors du Canada uniquement si les périodes de résidence de ladite personne, totalisées conformément á la section 1, sont au moins égales á la période minimale de résidence au Canada exigée par la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse pour le versement de la pension hors du Canada;

b) une allocation et un supplément de revenu garanti sont versés á une personne qui est hors du Canada uniquement dans la mesure permise par la Loi sur la sécurité de la vieillesse.

Article XVI

Prestations aux termes du Régime de pensions du Canada

Si une personne a droit á une prestation uniquement á la suite de l’application des dispositions relatives á la totalisation énoncées á la section 1, l’institution compétente du Canada détermine le montant de la prestation payable á ladite personne comme suit:

a) la composante liée aux gains de la prestation est calculée conformément aux dispositions du Régime de pensions du Canada, uniquement en fonction des gains ouvrant droit a pension crédités aux termes dudit Régime;

b) la composante á taux uniforme de la prestation est déterminée en multipliant:

(i) le montant de la composante á taux uniforme de la prestation détermine conformément aux dispositions du Régime de pensions du Canada

par

(ii) la fraction qui exprime le rapport entre les périodes de cotisations au Régime de pensions du Canada et la période minimale d’admissibilité á ladite prestation aux termes dudit Régime, mais ladite fraction n’excéde en aucun cas la valeur de un.

Section 3

PRESTATIONS AUX TERMES DE LA LÉGISLATION DE LA RÉPUBLIQUE DE HONGRIE

Article XVII

Calcul du montant de la prestation payable

1. Si, aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie, l’admissibilité á une prestation peut étre établie uniquement par l’entremise de l’application des dispositions de totalisation de la section 1, l’institution compétente de la République de Hongrie:

a) calcule le montant théorique de la prestation qui serait versée si les périodes d’admissibilité totales accumulées aux termes de la législation des deux Parties contractantes avaient été accumulées aux termes uniquement de la législation de la République de Hongrie; et

b) selon le montant théorique calculé conformément á l’alinéa a), détermine le montant de la prestation payable en utilisant le rapport entre les périodes d’admissibilité accumulées aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie et les périodes d’admissibilité totales accumulées aux termes de la législation des deux Parties contractantes.

2. Aux fins du calcul du montant d’une prestation en vertu de l’application du paragraphe 1, on ne tient compte que du revenu gagné aux termes de la législation de la République de Hongrie et des cotisations payées en vertu de ladite législation.

Titre IV

DISPOSITIONS ADMINISTRATIVES ET DIVERSES

Article XVIII

Arrangement administratif

1. Les autorités compétentes des Parties contractantes fixent, au moyen d’un arrangement administratif, les modalités requises á l’application du présent Accord.

2. Les organismes de liaison des Parties contractantes sont désignés dans ledit arrangement.

Article XIX

Assistance mutuelle

1. Les autorités et institutions compétentes chargées de l’application du présent Accord:

a) s’offrent leurs bons services et se fournissent mutuellement assistance aux fins de la détermination du droit á toute prestation ou du montant de toute prestation aux termes du présent Accord ou aux termes de la législation á laquelle le présent Accord s’applique tout comme si ladite question touchait l’application de leur propre législation;

b) se transmettent mutuellement, dés que possible, tout renseignement concernant les mesures adoptées par celles-ci aux fins de l’application du présent Accord ou les modifications apportées á leur législation respective dans la mesure oú lesdites modifications influent sur l’application du présent Accord.

2. Sous réserve du paragraphe 3 et de toutes dispositions contenues dans un arrangement administratif conclu aux termes de l’article XVIII concernant le remboursement de certains types de dépenses, l’assistance mentionnée á l’alinéa 1a) doit étre fournie sans frais.

3. Si l’institution compétente d’une Partie contractante exige qu’un prestataire ou un bénéficiaire qui habite sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante subisse un examen médical, l’institution compétente de la derniére Partie contractante, á la demande de l’institution compétente de la premiere Partie contractante, doit prendre les dispositions nécessaires pour effectuer cet examen. Si l’examen médical est effectué uniquement aux fins de l’institution qui le demande, ladite institution rembourse les frais d’examen á l’institution compétente de l’autre Partie contractante. Toutefois, si l’examen médical est utilisé par les deux institutions compétentes, alors il n’y a aucun remboursement des frais.

Article XX

Transmission et protection des renseignements personnels

1. Les autorités et institutions compétentes d’une Partie contractante doivent conformément:

a) á la législation de la premiére Partie contractante, et

b) au présent Accord ou á tout arrangement conclu aux termes de l’article XVIII aux fins de la mise en oeuvre du présent Accord,

transmettent aux autorités et institutions compétentes de l’autre Partie contractante tout renseignement en leur possession au sujet d’une personne nécessaire aux fins de l’application du présent Accord ou de la législation dont reléve le présent Accord.

2. Tout renseignement au sujet d’une personne transmis aux termes du paragraphe 1 par une autorité ou une institution compétente d’une Partie contractante á une autorité ou á une institution compétente de l’autre Partie contractante doit étre protégé par chacune des Parties contractantes conformément á sa législation et aux dispositions suivantes:

a) L’autorité ou l’institution compétente de la Partie contractante á laquelle sont transmis les renseignements doit les traiter comme confidentiels et doit les protéger de facon efficace contre un accés non autorisé, des modifications non autorisées et la divulgation non autorisée conformément á la législation de ladite Partie contractante.

b) L’autorité ou l’institution compétente de la Partie contractante á laquelle sont transmis les renseignements peut utiliser lesdits renseignements et les divulguer á d’autres institutions et organismes de ladite Partie contractante, aux fins de la mise en oeuvre du présent Accord ou de la législation de ladite Partie contractante. Les renseignements peuvent étre utilisés á d’autres fins et peuvent étre divulgués á d’autres organismes uniquement dans la mesure oú la légilation de ladite Partie contractante le permet expressément. Les autorités compétentes d’une Partie contractante informent l’autre au sujet de toutes les modifications apportées á sa législation concernant la protection des renseignements personnels et, en particulier, á des fins supplémentaires auxquelles ces renseignements peuvent étre utilisés ou divulgués á d’autres organismes. La Partie contractante dont la législation a été modifiée procede á des négociations, á la demande de l’autre Partie contractanle, poux modifier ou compléter le présent Accord, selon ce qui est exigé.

c) Dans des cas individuels, l’autorité ou l’institution compétente á laquelle sont transmis les renseignements informe l’autorité ou l’institution compétente qui a transmis les renseignements, á sa demande, de l’utilisation de ces renseignements et des résultats.

d) La personne concernée doit avoir le droit, á la demande de l’autorité ou de l’institution de l’une ou l’autre des Parties contractantes, d’étre informée des renseignements qui ont été transmis et des fins pour lesquelles lesdits renscignements ont été demandés ou transmis, selon le cas.

e) L’autorité ou l’institution compétente qui transmet des renseignements doit prendre toutes les mesures raisonnables pour s’assurer que les renseignements sont exacts et se limitent strictement á ce qui est absolument nécessaire aux finn de la transmission. S’il devient évident que des renseignements incxacts ou des renseignements dont la transmission est interdite aux termes de la législation de la Partie contractante qui transmet les renseignements sont transmis, l’autorité ou l’institution compétente qui a recu les renseignements doit en étre immédiatement informée et doit corriger immédiatement les renseignements inexacts. Elle doit également supprimer tout renseignement transmis dont la transmission est interdite, sauf si lesdits renseignements sont nécessaires pour contrer des abus ou enquéter sur une fraude dans le contexte de la législation qu’elle administre ou tout autre délit semblable.

f) L’autorité ou l’institution compétente de la Partie contractante á laquelle sont transmis les renseignements doit supprimer lesdits renseignements conformément á la législation de ladite Partie contractante.

Article XXI

Exemption ou réduction de taxes, de droits et de frais

1. Toute exemption ou réduction de taxes, de droits judiciaires, de droits de chancellerie et de frais administratifs prévue par la législation d’une Partie contractante, relativement á la délivrance d’un certificat ou d’un document requis aux fins de l’application de ladite législation, est étendue aux certificats et aux documents requis aux fins de l’application de la législation de l’autre Partie contractante.

2. Tout document á caractére officiel requis aux fins de l’application du présent Accord est exempté de toute légalisation par les autorités diplomatiques ou consulaires et de toute autre formalité similaire.

Article XXII

Langue de communication

Aux fins de l’application du présent Accord, les autorités et les institutions compétentes des Parties contractantes peuvent communiquer directement entre elles dans l’une de leurs langues officielles.

Article XXIII

Présentation de demandes, avis ou appels

1. Les demandes, avis et appels touchant le droit á une prestation ou le montant d’une prestation aux termes de la législation d’une Partie contractante qui, aux termes de ladite législation, auraient dú étre présentés dans un délai prescrit á l’autorité ou á l’institution compétente de ladite Partie contractante, mais qui sont présentés dans le méme délai á l’autorité ou á l’institution de l’autre Partie contractante, sont réputés avoir été présentés á l’autorité ou á l’institution compétente de la premiére Partie contractante. La date de présentation des demandes, avis ou appels á l’atutorité ou á l’institution de l’autre Partie contractante est considérée étre la date de présentation á l’autorité ou l’institution compétente de la premiére Partie contractante.

2. Sous réserve de la deuxiéme phrase du présent paragraphe, une demande de prestation aux termes de la législation d’une Partie contractante, présentée aprés l’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord, est réputée étre une demande de préstation correspondante aux termes de la législation de l’autre Partie contractante, á condition que le requérant, au moment de la demande:

a) demande qu’elle soit considérée comme une demande aux termes de la législation de l’autre Partie contractante, ou

b) fournisse des renseignements indiquant que des périodes admissibles ont été accomplies aux termes de la législation de l’autre Partie contractante.

La phrase susmentionnée ne s’applique pas si le requérant a demandé que sa demande de prestation aux termes de la législation de l’autre Partie contractante soit différée.

3. Dans tout cas ou les dispositions du paragraphe 1 ou 2 s’appliquent, l’autorité ou l’institution qui a recu la demande, l’avis ou l’appel le transmet sans tarder á l’autorité ou á l’institution de l’autre Partie contractante.

Article XXIV

Versement des prestations

1. L’institution compétente d’une Partie contractante s’acquitte de ses obligations aux termes du présent Accord en devises de ladite Partie contractante.

2. Les prestations sont versées aux bénéficiaires exemptes de toute retenue pour frais administratifs pouvant étre exigés relativement au versement des prestations.

3. Si l’une des Parties contractantes prescrit des restrictions monétaires ou d’autres mesures semblables qui limitent les versements, les virements ou les transferts de fonds ou d’instruments financiers aux personnes qui résident hors de son territoire, ladite Partie contractante prend, sans délai, les mesures nécessaires afin de sauvegarder les versements de tout montant á étre versé aux termes du présent Accord aux personnes visées á l’article III qui résident sur le territoire de l’autre Partie contractante.

Article XXV

Résolution des différends

1. Les institutions compétentes des Parties contractantes s’engagent á résoudre, dans la mesure du possible, tout différend relatif á l’interprétation ou a l’application du présent Accord, conformément á son esprit et á les principes fondamentaux. Si les institutions compétentes n’ont pas résolu le différend, les autorités compétentes des Parties contractantes doivent le faire.

2. Les Parties contractantes se consulteront, sans délai, á la demande d’une Partie contractante concernant tout sujet qui n’a pas été résolu par les institutions et autorités compétentes conformément aux dispositions du paragraphe 1.

3. Tout différend entre les Parties contractantes relatif á l’interprétation du présent Accord qui n’a pas été résolu ou réglé á la suite de consultation conformément aux dispositions du paragraphe 1 ou 2 doit étre, á la demande de l’une des Parties contractantes, soumis á un tribunal arbitral.

4. Á moins que les Parties contractantes n’en décident autrement d’un commun accord, le tribunal arbitral est composé de trois arbitres, desquels un est nommé par chacune des Parties contractantes dans les deux mois suivant la date de réception de la demande d’arbitrage, et ces deux arbitres ainsi nommés nommeront á leur tour, dans les deux mois suivant le dernier avis de nomination, une tierce personne qui agira á titre de président; toutefois, si une des Parties contractantes ne parvient pas á nommer son arbitre ou si les deux arbitres ne peuvent s’entendre sur la nomination du troisiéme arbitre, l’autorité compétente de l’autre Partie contractante invite le Président de la Cour internationale de justice de nommer l’arbitre de la prémiére Partie contractante ou les deux arbitres invitent le Président de la Cour internationale de Justice de nommer le Président du tribunal arbitral.

5. Si le Président de la Cour internationale de justice est un citoyen de l’une ou l’autre des Parties contractantes, la fonction de nomination est transférée au vice-président ou au membre de la Cour dont le rang est le plus élevé qui n’est pas un citoyen de l’une ou l’autre des Parties contractantes.

6. Le tribunal arbitral fixe ses propres procédures, cependant il devra en arriver á une décision par voix de la majorité.

7. La décision du tribunal arbitral est obligatoire et définitive.

Article XXVI

Ententes avec une province du Canada

L’autorité concernée de la République de Hongrie et une province du Canada peuvent conclure des ententes portant sur toute matiére de sécurité sociale relevant de la compétence provinciale au Canada pour autant que ces ententes ne soient pas contraires aux dispositions du présent Accord.

Titre V

DISPOSITIONS TRANSITOIRES ET FINALES

Article XXVII

Dispositions transitoires

1. Toute période admissible accomplie avant la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord est prise en considération aux fins de déterminer le droit á une prestation aux termes du présent Accord ainsi que son montant.

2. Aucune disposition du présent Accord ne confere le droit de toucher une préstation pour une période antéricure á la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord.

3. Sous réserve des dispositions du paragraphe 2, une prestation, autre qu’une prestation forfaitaire, est versée aux termes du présent Accord á l’égard d’événements antérieurs á la date d’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord.

Article XXVIII

Durée et résiliation

1. Le présent Accord demeure en vigueur sans limitation de durée. Il peut étre résilié en tout temps par l’une des Parties contractantes sur présentation d’un préavis écrit de 12 mois á l’autre Partie contractante.

2. En cas de résiliation du présent Accord, tout droit acquis par une personne aux termes des dispositions dudit Accord est maintenu et des négociations sont engagées pour le réglement de tout droit alors en cours d’acquisition aux termes desdites dispositions.

Article XXIX

Entrée en vigueur

Le présent Accord entre en vigueur le premier jour du quatriéme mois suivant le dernier jour du mois au cours duquel les Parties contractantes ont échangé des avis écrits par l’entremise des voies diplomatiques confirmant que leurs exigences législatives respectives pour l’entrée en vigueur du présent Accord sont respectées. La date de l’échange des avis écrits est la date de livraison du dernier avis.

En foi de quoi, les soussignés, dument autorisés á cet effet, ont signé le présent Accord.

Fait en deux exemplaires á Budapest, ce quatriéme jour de mars 2002, dans les langues francaise, anglaise et hongroise, chaque texte faisant également foi.”

„Egyezmény a Magyar Köztársaság és Kanada között a szociális biztonságról

A Magyar Köztársaság

és

Kanada

a továbbiakban »Szerződő Felek«,

attól az óhajtól vezérelve, hogy együttműködjenek a szociális biztonság területén,

elhatározták, hogy e célból egyezményt kötnek, és megállapodtak az alábbiakban:

I. Rész

ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

I. Cikk

Meghatározások

1. Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában

»állami alkalmazás«:

a Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében az állami/költségvetési intézmények által történő alkalmazás, ideértve a köztisztviselőként, a közalkalmazottként, a fegyveres erők, a közrendvédelmi szervek vagy a polgári nemzetbiztonsági szolgálatok hivatásos tagjaként; bírósági, igazságügyi, ügyészségi jogviszonyban történő alkalmazást; és

Kanada tekintetében a kanadai kormány által történő alkalmazás, ideértve a Kanadai fegyveres erők vagy a Kanadai Királyi Lovasrendőrség tagjaként történő alkalmazást, vagy Kanada valamely tartományának vagy területének kormánya vagy önkormányzati testülete által történő alkalmazást;

»beszámítható időszak«:

a Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerinti járulékfizetési időszak, vagy ezen jogszabályok szerint járulékfizetési időszakkal egyenértékűnek tekintett, vagy akként elfogadott időszak; és

Kanada tekintetében, olyan járulékfizetési vagy tartózkodási időszak, amely egy Kanada jogszabályai szerinti ellátásra való jogosultság megszerzéséhez szükséges, és magában foglalja azon időszakot, amelyre vonatkozóan a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer (Canada Pension Plan) szerint rokkantsági nyugdíj folyósítandó;

»ellátás« az egyik Szerződő Fél tekintetében bármely pénzbeli ellátás, amelyről az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályai rendelkeznek, és magában foglal bármely, a pénzbeli ellátásra vonatkozó pótlékot vagy emelést;

»illetékes hatóság« az egyik Szerződő Fél tekintetében az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályai alkalmazásáért felelős miniszter vagy miniszterek;

»illetékes intézmény«:

a Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai alkalmazásáért felelős intézmény vagy hivatal; és

Kanada tekintetében az illetékes hatóság;

„jogszabályok« az egyik Szerződő Fél tekintetében az adott Szerződő Fél vonatkozásában a II. Cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott jogszabályok;

„kereső tevékenység«:

a Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében bármely olyan tevékenység, amelynek célja jövedelemszerzés, és amely a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik; és

Kanada tekintetében nyugdíjra jogosító foglalkoztatás vagy bármely olyan tevékenység, amely önálló vállalkozásból eredő keresetet eredményez, ezek a fogalmak a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer meghatározásai szerinti értelemben.

2. Jelen cikkben nem meghatározott fogalmaknak az alkalmazandó jogszabályokban meghatározott jelentést kell tulajdonítani.

II. Cikk

Az Egyezmény tárgyi hatálya

1. Jelen Egyezmény tárgyi hatálya az alábbi jogszabályokra terjed ki:

a) Kanada tekintetében:

(i) az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény (Old Age Security Act) és a hatálya alá tartozó rendeletek, és

(ii) a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer (Canada Pension Plan) és a hatálya alá tartozó rendeletek;

b) a Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében:

(i) a társadalombiztosítási járulékok fizetésére vonatkozó jogszabályok, és

(ii) a társadalombiztosítási nyugdíjakra vonatkozó jogszabályok.

2. A 3. bekezdés figyelembevételével a jelen Egyezmény egyaránt vonatkozik azokra a törvényekre és rendeletekre, amelyek az 1. bekezdésben meghatározott jogszabályokat módosítják, kiegészítik, egységes szerkezetbe foglalják vagy azok helyébe lépnek.

3. Jelen Egyezmény vonatkozik továbbá azokra a törvényekre és rendeletekre, amelyek az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályait kiterjesztik új igényjogosulti kategóriákra vagy új ellátásokra, hacsak az adott Szerződő Fél ellenkező értelmű értesítést nem adott át a másik Szerződő Félnek az ilyen törvények vagy rendeletek hatálybalépésétől számított 3 hónapon belül.

III. Cikk

Az Egyezmény személyi hatálya

Jelen Egyezmény személyi hatálya kiterjed:

a) bármely személyre, aki egyik vagy mindkét Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik vagy tartozott, és

b) más személyekre olyan mértékben, amennyiben az alkalmazandó jogszabályok szerint jogokat származtatnak az a) pontban meghatározott személyektől.

IV. Cikk

Egyenlő elbánás

Az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai alkalmazása során a III. Cikkben meghatározott bármely személy ugyanolyan jogokkal és kötelezettségekkel rendelkezik ezen jogszabályok szerint, mint az adott Szerződő Fél állampolgárai.

V. Cikk

Ellátások kivitele

1. Jelen Egyezmény ellenkező rendelkezése hiányában, az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint a III. Cikkben meghatározott bármely személy részére folyósítandó ellátásokat - ideértve a jelen Egyezmény szerint szerzett ellátásokat is - nem lehet csökkenteni, módosítani, felfüggeszteni, megszüntetni vagy megvonni pusztán annál a ténynél fogva, hogy az érintett személy a másik Szerződő Fél területén tartózkodik, és ezek az ellátások akkor is folyósítandók, ha az érintett személy a másik Szerződő Fél területén tartózkodik.

2. Jelen Egyezmény szerint a III. Cikkben meghatározott személynek folyósítandó ellátások akkor is folyósítandók, ha az érintett személy egy harmadik állam területén tartózkodik.

3. A Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében ez a cikk nem vonatkozik azokra az ellátásokra, amelyek a Magyar Köztársaság és egy harmadik állam között megkötött, területi elven alapuló egyezmények szerint folyósítandók.

II. Rész

AZ ALKALMAZANDÓ JOGSZABÁLYOKRA VONATKOZÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

VI. Cikk

Általános szabály

A VII-X. Cikkek figyelembevételével az a személy, aki kereső tevékenységet folytat az egyik Szerződő Fél területén, e tevékenység tekintetében csak az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik.

VII. Cikk

Kihirdetés

1. Amennyiben azt a személyt, aki az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik, és akit olyan munkáltató foglalkoztat, akinek üzleti székhelye az adott Szerződő Fél területén található, munkavégzésre kiküldenek e foglalkoztatás keretében a másik Szerződő Fél területére, ez a személy e munkavégzés tekintetében csak az első Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik, mintha e munkavégzés annak a területén történne.

2. Az 1. bekezdés a 60 hónapnál hosszabb időtartamú kiküldetésre csak mindkét Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága, vagy az általuk kijelölt intézmények vagy hivatalok előzetes hozzájárulása esetén vonatkozik.

VIII. Cikk

Önálló vállalkozás

1. A VII. Cikk 1. bekezdése megfelelően alkalmazandó arra az önálló vállalkozó személyre, aki az egyik Szerződő Fél területén lakik, és aki önálló vállalkozói tevékenységet a másik Szerződő Fél területén folytat.

2. Ha az 1. bekezdés alkalmazása során egy önálló vállalkozó személy az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint sem köteles járulékokat fizetni ezen önálló vállalkozói tevékenység után, abban az esetben a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai vagy az általuk kijelölt intézmények vagy hivatalok közös megegyezéssel határozzák meg, hogy mely Szerződő Fél jogszabályai vonatkoznak erre a személyre.

IX. Cikk

Állami alkalmazás

1. Jelen Egyezmény bármely rendelkezésétől függetlenül, A diplomáciai kapcsolatokról szóló, Bécsben, 1961. április 18-án aláírt nemzetközi szerződés és A konzuli kapcsolatokról szóló, Bécsben, 1963. április 24-én aláírt nemzetközi szerződés szociális biztonságra vonatkozó rendelkezései továbbra is alkalmazandók.

2. Az a személy, aki az egyik Szerződő Fél állami alkalmazásában van, és akit a másik Szerződő Fél területére rendelnek ki munkavégzésre, e foglalkoztatás tekintetében csak az első Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik.

3. Az 1. és 2. bekezdések rendelkezéseinek kivételével, az a személy, aki az egyik Szerződő Fél területén lakik, és aki ott a másik Szerződő Fél állami alkalmazásában van, e foglalkoztatás tekintetében csak az első Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik. Amennyiben azonban ez a személy e foglalkoztatás kezdetét megelőzően az őt foglalkoztató Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint járulékokat fizetett, akkor a foglalkoztatás kezdetétől vagy a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépésétől számított 6 hónapon belül, - aszerint, hogy melyik következett be később - választhat, hogy csak az utóbbi Szerződő Fél jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozzon.

X. Cikk

Kivételek

A Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai vagy az általuk kijelölt intézmények vagy hivatalok közös megegyezéssel kivételeket tehetnek a VI-IX. Cikkek rendelkezései alól:

a) a munkavállaló és munkáltatója közös kérelmére, vagy az önálló vállalkozó kérelmére, az érintett személy tekintetében, vagy

b) a személyek bármely kategóriája tekintetében.

XI. Cikk

Bizonyos tartózkodási időszakok meghatározása Kanada jogszabályai tekintetében

1. Az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény (Old Age Security Act) szerinti ellátások összegének kiszámítása céljából:

a) ha egy személy a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer (Canada Pension Plan) vagy Kanada egy tartományának átfogó nyugdíjrendszere hatálya alá tartozik a Magyar Köztársaságban való bármely ideiglenes vagy állandó tartózkodási időszak alatt, ez az időszak Kanadában való tartózkodási időszaknak tekintendő az érintett személy, továbbá házastársa vagy élettársa és a vele együtt lakó eltartottjai esetében, akik foglalkoztatás vagy önálló vállalkozás címén nem tartoznak a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai alá;

b) ha egy személy a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozik Kanadában való bármely ideiglenes vagy állandó tartózkodási időszak alatt, ez az időszak nem tekintendő Kanadában való tartózkodási időszaknak sem az érintett személy, sem házastársa vagy élettársa és a vele együtt lakó eltartottjai esetében, akik foglalkoztatás vagy önálló vállalkozás címén nem tartoznak a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer (Canada Pension Plan) vagy Kanada egy tartományának átfogó nyugdíjrendszere hatálya alá.

2. Az 1. bekezdés alkalmazásában:

a) egy személy csak akkor tekintendő a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer (Canada Pension Plan) vagy Kanada egy tartományának átfogó nyugdíjrendszere hatálya alá tartozónak a Magyar Köztársaságban való ideiglenes vagy állandó tartózkodási időszaka alatt, ha az érintett személy az adott rendszer szerint járulékokat fizet ezen időszak alatt foglalkoztatás vagy önálló vállalkozás címén;

b) egy személy csak akkor tekintendő a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai hatálya alá tartozónak a Kanadában való ideiglenes vagy állandó tartózkodási időszaka alatt, ha az érintett személy ezen jogszabályok szerint kötelező járulékokat fizet ezen időszak alatt foglalkoztatás vagy önálló vállalkozás címén.

III. Rész

AZ ELLÁTÁSOKRA VONATKOZÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

1. Fejezet

ÖSSZESZÁMÍTÁS

XII. Cikk

Kanada és a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerinti időszakok

1. Azokban az esetekben, amikor az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai egy ellátásra való jogosultság megszerzését, fenntartását vagy feléledését beszámítható időszakok szerzésétől teszik függővé, és amikor egy személy azért nem jogosult egy ellátásra, mert nem szerzett elegendő beszámítható időszakot ezen jogszabályok szerint ahhoz, hogy jogosult legyen az adott ellátásra, az adott Szerződő Fél illetékes intézménye az érintett személy adott ellátásra való jogosultsága megállapításához figyelembe veszi a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint szerzett beszámítható időszakokat, a 2-5. bekezdéseknek megfelelően, feltéve, hogy ezek az időszakok nem fedik át egymást.

2. a) Kanada Öregségi Biztonsági törvénye szerinti ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint beszámítható időszak Kanada területén való tartózkodási időszaknak tekintendő;

b) a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer szerinti ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához egy olyan naptári év, amelyből legalább 90 nap a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint beszámítható időszakot képez, olyan évnek tekintendő, amely a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer szerint beszámítható.

3. A Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerinti öregségi ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához:

a) egy olyan naptári év, amely a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer szerint beszámítható időszak, a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint 365 napos beszámítható időszaknak tekintendő;

b) amennyiben az a) pontban meghatározott időszakok nem elegendőek egy ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához, egy olyan nap, amely Kanada Öregségi Biztonsági törvénye szerint beszámítható időszak, és amely nincs átfedésben a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer szerint beszámítható időszakkal, olyan napnak tekintendő, amely a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint beszámítható időszak.

4. A Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerinti rokkantsági ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához egy olyan naptári év, amely a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer szerint beszámítható időszak, a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint 365 napos beszámítható időszaknak tekintendő.

5. A Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerinti ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához a III. Cikk b) pontjában meghatározott személy részére értelemszerűen a 3. vagy 4. bekezdés alkalmazandó.

XIII. Cikk

Harmadik állam jogszabályai szerinti időszakok

1. Ha egy személy a Szerződő Felek jogszabályai szerinti, a XII. Cikk rendelkezései szerint összeszámított beszámítható időszakok alapján nem jogosult ellátásra, az érintett személy adott ellátásra való jogosultsága ezen időszakok és olyan harmadik állam jogszabályai szerint szerzett beszámítható időszakok összeszámításával állapítandó meg, amely államhoz mindkét Szerződő Felet a beszámítható időszakok összeszámításáról is rendelkező szociális biztonsági jogi eszközök kötnek.

2. Az 1. bekezdés nem vonatkozik azon beszámítható időszakokra, amelyeket olyan harmadik állam jogszabályai szerint szereztek, amellyel a Magyar Köztársaság területi elven alapuló egyezményt kötött.

XIV. Cikk

Összeszámítandó minimális időszak

Jelen Egyezmény bármely más rendelkezésétől függetlenül, amennyiben egy személy által valamely Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint szerzett beszámítható időszakok teljes időtartama egy évnél kevesebb, és ha csak ezen időszakok figyelembevételével nem áll fenn egy ellátásra való jogosultság az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint, az adott Szerződő Fél illetékes intézménye nem köteles ellátást fizetni az érintett személynek ezen időszakokra a jelen Egyezmény értelmében.

2. Fejezet

KANADA JOGSZABÁLYAI SZERINTI ELLÁTÁSOK

XV. Cikk

Az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény szerinti ellátások

1. Ha egy személy egy öregségi biztonsági nyugdíjra vagy segélyre kizárólag az 1. fejezet összeszámítási rendelkezései alkalmazásával válik jogosulttá, Kanada illetékes intézménye az érintett személy számára folyósítandó nyugdíj vagy segély összegét az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény résznyugdíj vagy segély folyósítását szabályozó rendelkezéseivel összhangban számítja ki, kizárólag azon Kanadában való tartózkodási időszakok alapján, amelyek e törvény szerint figyelembe vehetők.

2. Az 1. bekezdés vonatkozik arra a Kanada területén kívül tartózkodó személyre, aki Kanadában teljes nyugdíjra lenne jogosult, de aki nem tartózkodott Kanadában azon minimális időtartamig, amelyet az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény megkövetel Kanada területén kívüli nyugdíjfolyósításhoz.

3. Jelen Egyezmény bármely más rendelkezésétől függetlenül:

a) öregségi biztonsági nyugdíj Kanada területén kívül tartózkodó személynek csak akkor folyósítandó, ha az érintett személy tartózkodási időszakai az 1. fejezet rendelkezései szerinti összeszámítás után legalább azzal a Kanadában való minimális tartózkodási időszakkal megegyeznek, amelyet az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény megkövetel Kanada területén kívüli nyugdíjfolyósításhoz;

b) segély vagy garantált jövedelemkiegészítés Kanada területén kívül tartózkodó személynek csak olyan mértékben folyósítandó, amennyiben azt az Öregségi Biztonsági törvény megengedi.

XVI. Cikk

Kanada Nyugdíjrendszere szerinti ellátások

Ha egy személy egy ellátásra kizárólag az 1. fejezet összeszámítási rendelkezései alkalmazásával válik jogosulttá, Kanada illetékes intézménye az érintett személy számára folyósítandó ellátás összegét az alábbiak szerint számítja ki:

a) az ellátás keresettől függő részét a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer rendelkezéseivel összhangban határozza meg, kizárólag az adott rendszer szerint nyugdíjra jogosító kereset alapján;

b) az ellátás fix részének meghatározásához megszorozza:

(i) a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszer rendelkezéseivel összhangban meghatározott ellátás fix részének összegét

azzal

(ii) a törttel, amely a Kanadai Nyugdíjrendszerben teljesített járulékfizetési időszakoknak az adott rendszer szerint az adott ellátásra való jogosultság megállapításához megkövetelt minimális időszakhoz viszonyított arányát fejezi ki, azonban ennek a törtnek az értéke semmilyen esetben sem haladhatja meg az egyet.

3. Fejezet

A MAGYAR KÖZTÁRSASÁG JOGSZABÁLYAI SZERINTI ELLÁTÁSOK

XVII. Cikk

A folyósítandó ellátás összegének kiszámítása

1. Ha a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint egy ellátásra való jogosultság kizárólag az 1. fejezet összeszámítási rendelkezései alkalmazásával állapítható meg, a Magyar Köztársaság illetékes intézménye

a) kiszámítja az ellátásnak azt az elméleti összegét, amelyet akkor folyósítottak volna, ha a mindkét Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint szerzett összeszámított beszámítható időszakokat csak a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint szerezték volna; és

b) az a) pont szerint kiszámított elméleti összeg alapján meghatározza a folyósítandó ellátás tényleges összegét oly módon, hogy a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint szerzett összes beszámítható időszaknak a mindkét Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint szerzett összes beszámítható időszakhoz viszonyított arányát alkalmazza.

2. Egy ellátás összegének az 1. bekezdés alkalmazásával történő kiszámításához csak a Magyar Köztársaság jogszabályai szerint szerzett jövedelem és ezen jogszabályok szerint fizetett járulékok kerülnek figyelembevételre.

IV. Rész

IGAZGATÁSI ÉS EGYÉB RENDELKEZÉSEK

XVIII. Cikk

Igazgatási megállapodás

1. A Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai igazgatási megállapodásban határozzák meg a jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásához szükséges intézkedéseket.

2. A Szerződő Felek összekötő szerveit az igazgatási megállapodásban jelölik ki.

XIX. Cikk

Kölcsönös segítségnyújtás

1. Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásáért felelős illetékes hatóságok és intézmények:

a) felajánlják jószolgálatukat, és segítséget nyújtanak egymásnak a jelen Egyezmény, vagy a jelen Egyezmény tárgyi hatálya alá tartozó jogszabályok szerinti bármely ellátásra való jogosultságnak vagy az ellátás összegének megállapítása céljából, mintha az ügy a hazai jogszabályaik alkalmazását kívánná;

b) közölnek egymással, a lehető leghamarabb, minden információt azokra az intézkedésekre vonatkozóan, amelyeket a jelen Egyezmény alkalmazása érdekében tesznek, vagy a saját jogszabályaikban bekövetkezett változásokra vonatkozóan, amennyiben ezek a változások a jelen Egyezmény alkalmazását érintik.

2. A 3. bekezdés, valamint a XVIII. Cikk szerint megkötött, bizonyos kiadások megtérítését célzó igazgatási megállapodásban foglalt bármely rendelkezés figyelembevételével, az 1. bekezdés a) pontban hivatkozott segítség térítésmentesen nyújtandó.

3. Ha az egyik Szerződő Fél illetékes intézménye megkívánja, hogy egy kérelmező vagy igényjogosult, aki a másik Szerződő Fél területén lakik, orvosi vizsgálaton essen át, az utóbbi Szerződő Fél illetékes intézménye, az első Szerződő Fél illetékes intézményének kérésére, intézkedik e vizsgálat elvégeztetéséről. Ha az orvosi vizsgálat kizárólag az azt kérő intézmény céljait szolgálja, az adott illetékes intézmény megtéríti a másik Szerződő Fél illetékes intézményének a vizsgálat költségeit. Amennyiben azonban az orvosi vizsgálat mindkét illetékes intézmény céljait szolgálja, költségek megtérítésére nem kerül sor.

XX. Cikk

Személyes adatok átadása és védelme

1. Az egyik Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságai és intézményei, összhangban

a) az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályaival,

b) a jelen Egyezménnyel vagy a jelen Egyezmény alkalmazására a XVIII. Cikk szerint kötött bármely megállapodással,

a másik Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságai és intézményei számára átadnak egy személyre vonatkozó birtokukban lévő bármely adatot, amely a jelen Egyezmény vagy annak tárgyi hatálya alá tartozó jogszabályok alkalmazásához szükséges.

2. Az egyik Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága vagy intézménye által a másik Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága vagy intézménye részére az 1. bekezdés szerint átadott, egy személyre vonatkozó bármely adatot védelem illet meg mindkét Szerződő Félnél annak jogszabályaival és az alábbi rendelkezésekkel összhangban:

a) Annak a Szerződő Félnek az illetékes hatósága vagy intézménye, amelynek részére az adatokat átadták, ezeket az adatokat bizalmasan kezeli, és hatékonyan védelmezi jogosulatlan hozzáférés, jogosulatlan módosítások és jogosulatlan nyilvánosságra hozatal ellen, az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályaival összhangban.

b) Annak a Szerződő Félnek az illetékes hatósága vagy intézménye, amelynek részére az adatokat átadták, ezeket az adatokat felhasználhatja, és az adott Szerződő Fél más intézményeinek és hivatalainak tudomására hozhatja, a jelen Egyezménynek vagy az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályainak alkalmazása céljából. Az adatokat más célra felhasználni és más hivatalok tudomására hozni csak olyan mértékben lehet, amennyiben azt az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályai kifejezetten megengedik. A Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai tájékoztatják egymást a személyes adatok védelmére vonatkozó jogszabályaik minden módosításáról, különösképpen pedig minden további célról, amelyre az ilyen adatokat fel lehet használni vagy más hivatalok tudomására hozni. Az a Szerződő Fél, amelynek jogszabályait módosították, a másik Szerződő Fél kérésére tárgyalásokat kezd a jelen Egyezmény szükség szerinti módosítása vagy kiegészítése céljából.

c) Egyedi esetekben az az illetékes hatóság vagy intézmény, amelynek részére az adatok átadása történt, az adatokat átadó hatóság vagy intézmény kérésére tájékoztatja ez utóbbit az adatok felhasználásáról és annak eredményéről.

d) Az érintett személy jogosult arra, hogy bármely Szerződő Fél hatóságához vagy intézményéhez benyújtott kérelmére tájékoztassák azokról az adatokról, amelyeket átadtak és arról a célról, amelyre ezeket az adatokat kérték vagy átadták az adott esetben.

e) Az az illetékes hatóság vagy intézmény, amely az adatokat átadja, minden ésszerű intézkedést megtesz annak biztosítására, hogy az adatok helyesek legyenek, és szigorúan azokra korlátozódjanak, amelyek az átadás céljához elengedhetetlenül szükségesek. Ha nyilvánvalóvá válik, hogy helytelen adatokat vagy olyan adatokat adtak át, amelyek átadása tilos az átadó Fél jogszabályai szerint, azonnal értesíteni kell erről a tényről azt az illetékes hatóságot vagy intézményt, amely az adatokat kapta, és ez azonnal helyesbíti a helytelen adatokat. Egyúttal töröl bármely olyan átadott adatot, amelynek átadása tilos, kivéve, ha ez az adat a visszaélés elleni küzdelemhez, az általa alkalmazott jogszabályok összefüggésében csalás vagy hasonló büntetendő cselekmények üldözéséhez szükséges.

f) Annak a Szerződő Félnek az illetékes hatósága vagy intézménye, amelynek az adatokat átadták, ezeket az adatokat az adott Szerződő Fél jogszabályaival összhangban törli.

XXI. Cikk

Adók, díjak, illetékek és költségek alóli mentesítés vagy azok csökkentése

1. Az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai alkalmazásához bemutatandó bármely igazolás vagy dokumentum kiállításával kapcsolatban ezen jogszabályokban előírt adók, jogi díjak, konzuli díjak és igazgatási költségek alóli bármely mentesítés vagy azok bármely csökkentése kiterjed a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai alkalmazásához bemutatandó igazolásokra vagy dokumentumokra is.

2. Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásához bemutatandó bármely hivatalos jellegű dokumentum mentes a diplomáciai vagy konzuli hatóságok általi bármilyen hitelesítéstől vagy hasonló formalitásoktól.

XXII. Cikk

A kapcsolattartás nyelve

Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásához a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai és intézményei közvetlenül tarthatják egymással a kapcsolatot bármely Szerződő Fél bármely hivatalos nyelvén.

XXIII. Cikk

Kérelem, értesítés vagy fellebbezés benyújtása

1. Az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerinti ellátásra való jogosultságra vagy az ellátás összegére vonatkozó kérelmek, értesítések és fellebbezések, amelyeket ezen jogszabályok alkalmazásában meghatározott határidőn belül kellett volna benyújtani az adott Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságához vagy intézményéhez, de amelyeket ugyanezen határidőn belül a másik Szerződő Fél hatóságához vagy intézményéhez nyújtanak be, úgy kezelendők, mintha azokat az első Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságához vagy intézményéhez nyújtották volna be. A kérelmek, értesítések vagy fellebbezések a másik Szerződő Fél hatóságához vagy intézményéhez történt benyújtásának dátumát kell tekinteni az első Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságához vagy intézményéhez történő benyújtásuk dátumának.

2. E bekezdés második mondatának figyelembevételével, az egyik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerinti ellátásra való olyan kérelem, amelyet a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépése dátuma után nyújtanak be, a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerinti megfelelő ellátásra való kérelemnek tekintendő, amennyiben a kérelmező a kérelem benyújtásakor

a) kéri, hogy ezt a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerinti kérelemnek tekintsék, vagy

b) arra vonatkozó információkat közöl, hogy beszámítható időszakokat szerzett a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerint.

Az előző mondat nem alkalmazandó, amennyiben a kérelmező kéri, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai szerinti ellátásra való kérelmét halasszák el.

3. Bármely olyan esetben, amelyre az 1. vagy a 2. bekezdés vonatkozik, az a hatóság vagy intézmény, amelyhez a kérelmet, értesítést vagy fellebbezést benyújtották, azt késedelem nélkül eljuttatja a másik Szerződő Fél hatóságához vagy intézményéhez.

XXIV. Cikk

Ellátások folyósítása

1. Az egyik Szerződő Fél illetékes intézménye a jelen Egyezmény szerinti kötelezettségeit az adott Szerződő Fél valutanemében teljesíti.

2. Az igényjogosultak ellátásai az ellátások folyósításával kapcsolatosan esetlegesen felmerülő igazgatási költségek miatti levonásoktól mentesen folyósítandók.

3. Abban az esetben, ha az egyik Szerződő Fél devizakorlátozásokat vagy hasonló intézkedéseket vezetne be, amelyek korlátozzák a területén kívül tartózkodó személyek számára a kifizetéseket, pénzküldeményeket vagy pénz, illetőleg pénzügyi eszközök átutalását, az adott Szerződő Fél késedelem nélkül megfelelő intézkedéseket tesz arra, hogy biztosítson bármely folyósítást, amelyet a jelen Egyezmény szerint a III. Cikkben meghatározott azon személyeknek kell teljesíteni, akik a másik Szerződő Fél területén élnek.

XXV. Cikk

Vitás kérdések rendezése

1. A Szerződő Felek illetékes intézményei a jelen Egyezmény értelmezésével vagy alkalmazásával kapcsolatban felmerülő bármely vitás kérdést a lehetséges mértékig annak szelleme és alapelvei szerint oldanak meg. Ha az illetékes intézmények nem rendeztek egy vitás kérdést, akkor a Szerződő Felek illetékes hatóságai teszik azt meg.

2. A Szerződő Felek bármely Szerződő Fél kérésére haladéktalanul konzultálnak egymással olyan kérdéseket illetően, amelyeket az illetékes intézmények és hatóságok nem rendeztek az 1. bekezdés szerint.

3. A Szerződő Felek között a jelen Egyezmény értelmezésére vonatkozó bármely olyan vitás kérdést, amelyet nem oldottak meg vagy rendeztek konzultáció révén az 1. vagy a 2. bekezdés szerint, bármely Szerződő Fél kérésére választott bíróság elé terjesztik.

4. Hacsak a Szerződő Felek közösen másképpen nem döntenek, a választott bíróság három választott bíróból áll, akik közé mindegyik Szerződő Fél egy főt jelöl ki a választott bíróságra vonatkozó kérés kézhezvételétől számított két hónapon belül. Az így kijelölt két választott bíró, az utolsó kijelölési értesítéstől számított két hónapon belül, kijelöli a harmadik választott bírót, aki az elnöki feladatokat látja el. Abban az esetben, ha valamely Szerződő Fél elmulasztja kijelölni a saját választott bíróját vagy a két kijelölt választott bíró nem tud megegyezni a harmadik személyt illetően, a másik Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnökét felkéri, hogy jelölje ki az első Szerződő Fél választott bíróját, vagy a két kijelölt választott bíró felkéri a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnökét, hogy jelölje ki a választott bíróság elnökét.

5. Ha a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnöke valamely Szerződő Fél állampolgára, a kijelölés feladatát átadja a Bíróság alelnökének vagy a rangban következő tagjának, aki egyik Szerződő Félnek sem állampolgára.

6. A választott bíróság maga határozza meg ügyrendjét, de határozatait többségi szavazással hozza.

7. A választott bíróság döntése végleges és kötelező erejű.

XXVI. Cikk

Megállapodás Kanada egy tartományával

A Magyar Köztársaság hatáskörrel rendelkező hatósága és Kanada valamely tartománya megállapodást köthet bármely olyan szociális biztonsági kérdésben, amely Kanadában tartományi joghatóság alá tartozik, amennyiben az ilyen megállapodás a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek nem mond ellent.

V. Rész

ÁTMENETI ÉS ZÁRÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

XXVII. Cikk

Átmeneti rendelkezések

1. Jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépését megelőzően szerzett bármely beszámítható időszak figyelembe veendő a jelen Egyezmény szerinti ellátásra való jogosultság megállapítása és az ellátás összegének meghatározása céljából.

2. Jelen Egyezmény egyetlen rendelkezése sem keletkeztet jogot a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépését megelőző időtartamra vonatkozó ellátás igénybevételére.

3. A 2. bekezdés figyelembevételével ellátás, az egyösszegű folyósítás kivételével, folyósítandó a jelen Egyezmény szerint olyan eseményekre vonatkozóan is, amelyek a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépését megelőzően következtek be.

XXVIII. Cikk

Időtartam és felmondás

1. Jelen Egyezmény időtartamának korlátozása nélkül hatályban marad. Azt bármely Szerződő Fél bármikor felmondhatja, a másik Szerződő Félnek 12 hónappal korábban megküldött írásbeli értesítéssel.

2. Jelen Egyezmény felmondása esetén, egy személy által az Egyezmény rendelkezései szerint szerzett bármely jog fennmarad, és tárgyalásokra kerül sor azon jogok rendezésére vonatkozóan, amelyeknek ezen rendelkezések alapján történő megszerzése a felmondás időpontjában folyamatban volt.

XXIX. Cikk

Hatálybalépés

Jelen Egyezmény annak a hónapnak az utolsó napját követő negyedik hónap első napján lép hatályba, amely hónapban a Szerződő Felek diplomáciai úton kicserélték az arra vonatkozó írásos értesítéseiket, hogy a jelen Egyezmény hatálybaléptetéséhez szükséges belső jogi követelményeknek eleget tettek. Az írásos értesítések kicserélése dátumának az utolsó értesítés kézhezvételének dátuma tekintendő.

Fentiek hiteléül, az alulírottak, kellő meghatalmazás birtokában, aláírták a jelen Egyezményt.

Készült két-két eredeti példányban, Budapesten, 2002. év március hó 4. napján, angol, francia és magyar nyelven, mindegyik szöveg egyformán hiteles.

(Aláírások)”

3. § E törvény a kihirdetése napján lép hatályba. Az Egyezményben foglaltakat azonban 2003. október 1-jétől kell alkalmazni.