2003. évi LXIV. törvény

a biztonságos konténerekről szóló 1972. évi nemzetközi egyezmény kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés a Genfben, 1972. év december hó 2. napján aláírt, a biztonságos konténerekről szóló egyezményt (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

(Magyarország megerősítő okiratának letétbe helyezése a Kormányközi Tengerészeti Tanácskozó Szervezet főtitkáránál az 1974. év január hó 9. napján megtörtént. Az egyezmény a Magyarország vonatkozásában 1977. szeptember hó 6. napján lépett hatályba.)

2. § Az Egyezmény angol nyelvű szövege és hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„International Convention for Safe Containers, 1972

Preamble

The Contracting Parties,

recognising the need to maintain a high level of safety of human life in the handling, stacking and transporting of containers,

mindful of the need to facilitate international container transport,

recognising, in this context, the advantages of formalising common international safety requirements,

considering that this end may best be achieved by the conclusion of a Convention,

have decided to formalise structural requirements to ensure safety in the handling, stacking and transporting of containers in the course of normal operations, and to this end

have agreed as follows:

Article I

General obligation under the present Convention

The Contracting Parties undertake to give effect to the provisions of the present Convention and the annexes hereto, which shall constitute an integral part of the present Convention.

Article II

Definitions

For the purpose of the present Convention, unless expressly provided otherwise:

1. Container means an article of transport equipment:

a) of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use;

b) specially designed to facilitate the transport of goods, by one or more modes of transport, without intermediate reloading;

c) designed to be secured and/or readily handled, having corner fittings for these purposes;

d) of a size such that the area enclosed by the four outer bottom corners is either:

(i) at least 14 m2 (150 sq ft) or

(ii) at least 7 m2 (75 sq ft) if it is fitted with top corner fittings.

The term container includes neither vehicles or packaging; however, containers when carried on chassis are included.

2. Corner fittings means an arrangement of apertures and faces at the top and/or bottom of a container for the purposes of handling, stacking and/or securing.

3. Administration means the Government of a Contracting Party under whose authority containers are approved.

4. Approved means approved by the Administration.

5. Approval means the decision by an Administration that a design type or a container is safe within the terms of the present Convention.

6. International transport means transport between points of departure and destination situated in the territory of two countries to at least one of which the present Convention applies. The present Convention shall also apply when part of a transport operation between two countries takes place in the territory of a country to which the present Convention applies.

7. Cargo means any goods, wares, merchandise and articles of every kind whatsoever carried in the containers.

8. New container means a container the construction of which was commenced on or after the date of entry into force of the present Convention.

9. Existing container means a container which is not a new container.

10. Owner means the owner as provided for under the national law of the Contracting Party or the lessee or bailee, if an agreement between the parties provides for the exercise of the owner’s responsibility for maintenance and examination of the container by such lessee or bailee.

11. Type of container means the design type approved by the Administration.

12. Type-series container means any container manufactured in accordance with the approved design type.

13. Prototype means a container representative of those manufactured or to be manufactured in a design type series.

14. Maximum operating gross weight or rating or R means the maximum allowable combined weight of the container and its cargo.

15. Tare weight means the weight of the empty container including permanently affixed ancillary equipment.

16. Maximum permissible payload or P means the difference between maximum operating gross weight or rating and tare weight.

Article III

Application

1. The present Convention applies to new and existing containers used in international transport, excluding containers specially designed for air transport.

2. Every new container shall be approved in accordance with the pro-visions either for type-testing or for individual testing as contained in annex 1.

3. Every existing container shall be approved in accordance with the relevant provisions for approval of existing containers set out in annex I within five years from the date of entry into force of the present Convention.

Article IV

Testing, inspection, approval and maintenance

1. For the enforcement of the provisions of annex I every Administration shall establish an effective procedure for the testing, inspection and approval of containers in accordance with the criteria established in the present Convention, provided, however, that an Administration may entrust such testing, inspection and approval to Organisations duly authorised by it.

2. An Administration which entrusts such testing, inspection and approval to an Organisation shall inform the Secretary-General of the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (hereinafter referred to as „the Organisation”) for communication to Contracting Parties.

3. Application for approval may be made to the Administration of any Contracting Party.

4. Every container shall be maintained in a safe condition in accordance with the provisions of annex 1.

5. If an approved container does not in fact comply with the requirements of annexes I and II the Administration concerned shall take such steps as it deems necessary to bring the container into compliance with such requirements or to withdraw the approval.

Article V

Acceptance of approval

1. Approval under the authority of a Contracting Party, granted under the terms of the present Convention, shall be accepted by the other Contracting Parties for all purposes covered by the present Convention. It shall be regarded by the other Contracting Parties as having the same force as an approval issued by them.

2. A Contracting Party shall not impose any other structural safety requirements or tests on containers covered by the present Convention, provided, however, that nothing in the present Convention shall preclude the application of provisions of national regulations or legislation or of international agreements, prescribing additional structural safety requirements or tests for containers specially designed for the transport of dangerous goods, or for those features unique to containers carrying bulk liquids or for containers when carried by air. The term dangerous goods shall have that meaning assigned to it by international agreements.

Article VI

Control

1. Every container which has been approved under article III shall be subject to control in the territory of the Contracting Parties by officers duly authorised by such Contracting Parties. This control shall be limited to verifying that the container carries a valid Safety Approval Plate as required by the present Convention, unless there is significant evidence for believing that the condition of the container is such as to create an obvious risk to safety. In that case the officer carrying out the control shall only exercise it in so far as it may be necessary to ensure that the container is restored to a safe condition before it continues in service.

2. Where the container appears to have become unsafe as a result of a defect which may have existed when the container was approved, the Administration responsible for that approval shall be informed by the Contracting Party which detected the defect.

Article VII

Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval and accession

1. The present Convention shall be open for signature until 15 January 1973 at the Office of the United Nations at Geneva and subsequently from 1 February 1973 until 31 December 1973 inclusive at the Headquarters of the Organisation at London by all States Members of the United Nations or Members of any of the specialised agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency or Parties to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and by any other State invited by the General Assembly of the United Nations to become a Party to the present Convention.

2. The present Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States which have signed it.

3. The present Convention shall remain open for accession by any State referred to in paragraph 1.

4. Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Organisation (hereinafter referred to as „the Secretary-General”).

Article VIII

Entry into force

1. The present Convention shall enter into force twelve months from the date of the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

2. For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the present Convention after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, the present Convention shall enter into force twelve months after the date of the deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

3. Any State which becomes a Party to the present Convention after the entry into force of an amendment shall, failing an expression of a different intention by that State,

a) be considered as a Party to the Convention as amended; and

b) be considered as a Party to the non-amended Convention in relation to any Party to the Convention not bound by the amendment.

Article IX

Procedure for amending any part or parts of the present Convention

1. The present Convention may be amended upon the proposal of a Contracting Party by any of the procedures specified in this article.

2. Amendment after consideration in the Organisation:

a) Upon the request of a Contracting Party, any amendment proposed by it to the present Convention shall be considered in the Organisation. If adopted by a majority of two thirds of those present and voting in the Maritime Safety Committee of the Organisation, to which all Contracting Parties shall have been invited to participate and vote, such amendment shall be communicated to all Members of the Organisation and all Contracting Parties at least six months prior to its consideration by the Assembly of the Organisation. Any Contracting Party which is not a Member of the Organisation shall be entitled to participate and vote when the amendment is considered by the Assembly.

b) If adopted by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting in the Assembly, and if such majority includes a two-thirds majority of the Contracting Parties present and voting, the amendment shall be communicated by the Secretary-General to all Contracting Parties for their acceptance.

c) Such amendment shall come into force twelve months after the date on which it is accepted by two thirds of the Contracting Parties. The amendment shall come into force with respect to all Contracting Parties except those which, before it comes into force, make a declaration that they do not accept the amendment.

3. Amendment by a conference:

Upon the request of a Contracting Party, concurred in by at least one third of the Contracting Parties, a conference to which the States referred to in article VII shall be invited will be convened by the Secretary-General.

Article X

Special procedure for amending the annexes

1. Any amendment to the annexes proposed by a Contracting Party shall be considered in the Organisation at the request of that Party.

2. If adopted by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting in the Maritime Safety Committee of the Organisation to which all Contracting Parties shall have been invited to participate and to vote, and if such majority includes a two-thirds majority of the Contracting Parties present and voting, such amendment shall be communicated by the Secretary-General to all Contracting Parties for their acceptance.

3. Such an amendment shall enter into force on a date to be determined by the Maritime Safety Committee at the time of its adoption unless, by a prior date determined by the Maritime Safety Committee at the same time, one fifth or five of the Contracting Parties, whichever number is less, notify the Secretary-General of their objection to the amendment. Determination by the Maritime Safety Committee of the dates referred to in this paragraph shall be by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting, which majority shall include a two-thirds majority of the Contracting Parties present and voting.

4. On entry into force any amendment shall, for all Contracting Parties which have not objected to the amendment, replace and supersede any previous provision to which the amendment refers; an objection made by a Contracting Party shall not be binding on other Contracting Parties as to acceptance of containers to which the present Convention applies.

5. The Secretary-General shall inform all Contracting Parties and Members of the Organisation of any request and communication under this article and the date on which any amendment enters into force.

6. Where a proposed amendment to the annexes has been considered but not adopted by the Maritime Safety Committee, any Contracting Party may request the convening of a conference to which the States referred to in article VII shall be invited. Upon receipt of notification of concurrence by at least one third of the other Contracting Parties, such a conference shall be convened by the Secretary-General to consider amendments to the annexes.

Article XI

Denunciation

1. Any Contracting Party may denounce the present Convention by effecting the deposit of an instrument with the Secretary-General. The denunciation shall take effect one year from the date of such deposit with the Secretary-General.

2. A Contracting Party which has communicated an objection to an amendment to the annexes may denounce the present Convention and such denunciation shall take effect on the date of entry into force of such an amendment.

Article XII

Termination

The present Convention shall cease to be in force if the number of Contracting Parties is less than five for any period of twelve consecutive months.

Article XIII

Settlement of disputes

1. Any dispute between two or more Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of the present Convention which cannot be settled by negotiation or other means of settlement shall, at the request of one of them, be referred to an arbitration tribunal composed as follows: each party to the dispute shall appoint an arbitrator and these two arbitrators shall appoint a third arbitrator, who shall be Chairman. If, three months after receipt of a request, one of the parties has failed to appoint an arbitrator or if the arbitrators have failed to elect the Chairman, any of the parties may request the Secretary-General to appoint an arbitrator or the Chairman of the arbitration tribunal.

2. The decision of the arbitration tribunal established under the provisions of paragraph I shall be binding on the parties to the dispute.

3. The arbitration tribunal shall determine its own rules of procedure.

4. Decisions of the arbitration tribunal, both as to its procedures and its place of meeting and as to any controversy laid before it, shall be taken by majority vote.

5. Any controversy which may arise between the parties to the dispute as regards the interpretation and execution of the award may be submitted by any of the parties for judgement to the arbitration tribunal which made the award.

Article XIV

Reservations

1. Reservations to the present Convention shall be permitted, excepting those relating to the provisions of articles I to VI, XIII, the present article and the annexes, on condition that such reservations are communicated in writing and, if communicated before the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, are confirmed in that instrument. The Secretary-General shall communicate such reservations to all States referred to in article VII. made in accordance with paragraph 1:

a) modifies for the Contracting Party which made the reservation the provisions of the present Convention to which the reservation relates to the extent of the reservation;

b) modifies those provisions to the same extent for the other Contracting Parties in their relations with the Contracting Party which entered the reservation.

2. Any Contracting Party which has formulated a reservation under paragraph I may withdraw it at any time by notification to the Secretary-General.

Article XV

Notification

In addition to the notifications and communications provided for: in articles IX, X and XIV, the Secretary-General shall notify all the States referred to in article VII of the following:

a) signatures, ratifications, acceptances, approvals and accessions under article VII;

b) the dates of entry into force of the present Convention in accordance with article VIII;

c) the date of entry into force of amendments to the present Convention in accordance with articles IX and X;

d) denunciations under article XI;

e) the termination of the present Convention under article XII.

Article XVI

Authentic texts

The original of the present Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General, who shall communicate certified true copies to all States referred to in article VII.

In witness whereof the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed the present Convention.

Done at Geneva this second day of December, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-two.”

„A Biztonságos Konténerekről szóló 1972. évi Nemzetközi Egyezmény

Preambulum

A Szerződő Felek,

elismerve annak szükségességét, hogy a konténerek kezelése, halmazolása és szállítása során az emberi élet biztonságát fokozott mértékben védeni kell,

figyelemmel arra, hogy a nemzetközi konténeres szállítást meg kell könnyíteni,

elismerve ezzel kapcsolatban azokat az előnyöket, amelyek a közös nemzetközi biztonsági előírások kiadásából származhatnak,

megfontolva, hogy ezt legjobban Egyezmény kötésével lehet elérni,

elhatározták, hogy kiadják azokat a konténerszerkezeti előírásokat, amelyek rendes üzemeltetési feltételek közötti kezelésük, halmazolásuk és szállításuk biztonságát szolgálják és ebből a célból

megállapodtak a következőkben:

I. Cikk

A jelen Egyezményből eredő általános kötelezettség

A Szerződő Felek kötelezik magukat, hogy a jelen Egyezmény és annak szerves részét képező mellékletek rendelkezéseinek érvényt szereznek.

II. Cikk

Fogalommeghatározások

A jelen Egyezmény alkalmazása tekintetében kifejezetten eltérő rendelkezés hiányában:

1. „Konténer” kifejezés alatt olyan szállítóeszközt jelent, amely:

a) tartós jellegű és ennek megfelelően ismételt használathoz kellően szilárd,

b) kifejezetten úgy van kialakítva, hogy megkönnyítse egy vagy több szállítási móddal a rakomány megbontás nélküli szállítását,

c) úgy van kialakítva, hogy rögzíthető, illetve könnyen kezelhető legyen, az erre a célra szolgáló sarokelemekkel felszerelve,

d) olyan méretű, hogy az alsó négy sarokkal behatárolt területe

(i) legalább 14 m2 (150 négyzetláb) vagy

(ii) legalább 7 m2 (75 négyzetláb), ha felső sarokelemekkel rendelkezik.

A „konténer” kifejezés nem foglalja magában sem a járművet, sem a csomagolást; az alvázkeretes futóművön szállított konténer azonban idetartozik.

2. A „sarokelem” kifejezés a konténer felső, illetve alsó sarkán elhelyezett, nyílásokkal és felületekkel rendelkező olyan szerkezet, amely kezelés, halmazolás, illetve rögzítés céljára szolgál.

3. Az „Igazgatás” kifejezés annak a Szerződő Félnek a Kormányát jelenti, amelynek felhatalmazásával történik a konténer jóváhagyása.

4. A „jóváhagyott” kifejezés az Igazgatás által adott jóváhagyást jelenti.

5. A „jóváhagyás” kifejezés az Igazgatásnak azt a döntését jelenti, amely szerint egy szerkezeti típus vagy egy konténer a jelen Egyezményben előírt biztonságot nyújtja.

6. „Nemzetközi szállítás” az olyan szállítás, amelynek kiindulási és rendeltetési pontja két olyan ország területén van, amelyek közül legalább az egyik alkalmazza a jelen Egyezményt. A jelen Egyezményt kell alkalmazni abban az esetben is, ha két ország közötti szállítás egy része olyan ország területére esik, amely alkalmazza a jelen Egyezményt.

7. A „rakomány” kifejezés bármilyen olyan ipari terméket, árut, árucikket és tárgyat jelent, amelyet konténerben szállítanak.

8. „Új konténer” minden olyan konténer, amelynek gyártását a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépésekor vagy azt követően kezdték meg.

9. „Meglévő konténer” a nem új konténer.

10. „Tulajdonos” a Szerződő Fél belső joga szerint meghatározott tulajdonos vagy a bérlő, illetve a megőrzésre átvevő, ha a felek közötti megállapodás egyébként a tulajdonosra háruló és a konténer karbantartásával és vizsgálatával kapcsolatos felelősség gyakorlását a bérlőre, illetve a megőrzésre átvevőre ruházza.

11. „Konténertípus” az Igazgatás által jóváhagyott szerkezeti típus.

12. „Sorozatkonténer” bármely, a jóváhagyott szerkezeti típus alapján gyártott konténer.

13. „Prototípus” olyan konténert jelent, mely megfelel a típussorozatban gyártott vagy gyártandó konténernek.

14. „Legnagyobb üzemi össztömeg” vagy „R” a konténernek és rakományának megengedett legnagyobb együttes össztömegét jelenti.

15. „Saját tömeg” a konténer súlya üres állapotban, beleértve a tartósan rögzített szerelvényeket.

16. „Legnagyobb megengedhető hasznos terhelés” vagy „P” a legnagyobb üzemi össztömeg és a saját tömeg közötti különbséget jelenti.

III. Cikk

Alkalmazás

1. A jelen Egyezményt a nemzetközi szállításban használt új és meglévő konténerekre alkalmazzák, kivéve a kifejezetten légi szállításra kialakított konténereket.

2. Minden új konténert az I. mellékletnek a típusonkénti vagy az egyedi jóváhagyási próbára vonatkozó rendelkezései szerint jóvá kell hagyatni.

3. Minden meglévő konténert a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépésétől számított 5 éven belül az I. mellékletnek a meglévő konténerek jóváhagyására vonatkozó rendelkezései szerint jóvá kell hagyatni.

IV. Cikk

Próba, ellenőrzés, jóváhagyás és karbantartás

1. Az I. mellékletben foglalt előírások végrehajtása érdekében minden Igazgatásnak hatékony eljárást kell kialakítania a konténereknek a jelen Egyezményben megállapított feltételek szerint történő próbájára, ellenőrzésére és jóváhagyására, de az Igazgatás ilyen próba, ellenőrzés és jóváhagyás végrehajtásával általa megfelelően felhatalmazott szervezetet is megbízhat.

2. Annak az Igazgatásnak, amely a próbák, ellenőrzések és jóváhagyások végrehajtásával egy szervezetet bíz meg, erről a Kormányközi Tengerészeti Tanácskozó Szervezet Főtitkárát tájékoztatnia kell, hogy ezt a Szerződő Felekkel közölje.

3. Jóváhagyás iránti kérelmet bármely Szerződő Fél Igazgatásához lehet intézni.

4. Minden konténert az I. melléklet rendelkezéseinek megfelelő biztonságos állapotban kell tartani.

5. Ha egy jóváhagyott konténer nem elégíti ki az I. és a II. mellékletekben előírt követelményeket, az érintett Igazgatásnak meg kell tennie azokat az intézkedéseket, amelyeket szükségesnek ítél ahhoz, hogy a konténerek a fenti követelményeket kielégítő állapotba kerüljenek, vagy pedig a jóváhagyást vissza kell vonnia.

V. Cikk

A jóváhagyás elfogadása

1. A jelen Egyezmény szerint az egyik Szerződő Fél felelősségére kiadott jóváhagyást a többi Szerződő Félnek a jelen Egyezményben foglalt valamennyi rendelkezést illetően el kell fogadnia. A jóváhagyást a többi Szerződő Félnek az általuk kiadott jóváhagyással azonos érvényűnek kell tekintenie.

2. A Szerződő Felek a jelen Egyezmény hatálya alá eső konténerek szerkezeti biztonsága tárgyában más előírást adhatnak ki, illetve más próbát kötelezővé nem tehetnek, azonban a jelen Egyezmény egyetlen rendelkezése sem zárja ki azoknak a nemzetközi megállapodások vagy nemzeti szabályzatok, illetve jogszabályok rendelkezéseinek alkalmazását, amelyek járulékos szerkezetbiztonsági követelmények vagy próbák alkalmazását írják elő a kifejezetten veszélyes áruk szállítására tervezett konténerekre, folyadékot ömlesztve szállító konténerek jellegzetes elemeire vagy légi úton szállításra kerülő konténerekre. A „Veszélyes áruk” fogalmát a nemzetközi megállapodásokban meghatározottak szerint kell értelmezni.

VI. Cikk

Ellenőrzés

1. A III. Cikk szerint jóváhagyott minden konténer a Szerződő Felek területén e Szerződő Felek által erre felhatalmazott hivatalos személyek ellenőrzése alatt áll. Az ellenőrzésnek csak annak megállapítására kell szorítkoznia, hogy a konténer el van-e látva a jelen Egyezménynek megfelelő, érvényes Biztonsági jóváhagyási táblával, kivéve, ha a konténer állapota nyilvánvalóan veszélyezteti a biztonságot. Ilyen esetben az ellenőrzést végző hivatalos személynek olyan intézkedést kell tennie, amely elégséges ahhoz, hogy üzemeltetés folytatása előtt a konténer ismét biztonságos állapotba kerüljön.

2. Amennyiben a konténer feltehetőleg olyan hiányosság miatt nem felel meg többé a biztonsági előírásoknak, amely már jóváhagyásakor is fennállhatott, erről a hiányosságot megállapító Szerződő Fél tartozik értesíteni a jóváhagyásért felelős igazgatást.

VII. Cikk

Aláírás, megerősítés, elfogadás, jóváhagyás és csatlakozás

1. A jelen Egyezmény az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezete vagy szakosított szervei valamelyikének, illetve a Nemzetközi Atomenergia Ügynökség tagállamainak, a Nemzetközi Bíróság Alapokmányához csatlakozott feleknek, továbbá bármely más állam részére, amelyet az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezete arra felkér, hogy a jelen Egyezményben Szerződő Fél legyen, a Kormányközi Tengerészeti Tanácskozó Szervezet (a továbbiakban: Szervezet) székhelyén 1973. év január hó 15. napjáig, azt követően az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezete Genfi Hivatalánál 1973. év február hó 1. napjától 1973. év december hó 31. napjáig aláírásra nyitva áll.

2. A jelen Egyezményt az aláíró államoknak meg kell erősíteniük, el kell fogadniuk, vagy jóvá kell hagyniuk.

3. A jelen Egyezmény az 1. bekezdésben említett bármely állam részére csatlakozásra nyitva marad.

4. A megerősítésről, elfogadásról, jóváhagyásról vagy csatlakozásról szóló okiratot a Kormányközi Tengerészeti Tanácskozó Szervezet Főtitkáránál (a továbbiakban: Főtitkár) kell letétbe helyezni.

VIII. Cikk

Hatálybalépés

1. A jelen Egyezmény a megerősítésről, elfogadásról, jóváhagyásról vagy csatlakozásról szóló tizedik okirat letétbe helyezésének napjától számított tizenkét hónap elteltét követően lép hatályba.

2. Annak az államnak a tekintetében, amelyik a jelen Egyezményt a megerősítésről, elfogadásról, jóváhagyásról vagy csatlakozásról szóló tizedik okirat letétbe helyezése után erősíti meg, fogadja el, hagyja jóvá vagy csatlakozik hozzá, a jelen Egyezmény ennek az államnak a megerősítésről, elfogadásról, jóváhagyásról vagy csatlakozásról szóló okirat letétbe helyezésének napját követő tizenkét hónap eltelte után lép hatályba.

3. Minden állam, amely a jelen Egyezmény valamilyen módosításának hatálybalépését követően válik Szerződő Féllé, ettől eltérő szándéka kifejezésének hiányában:

a) a módosított Egyezmény részesének tekintendő; és

b) a nem módosított Egyezmény részesének tekintendő az Egyezmény minden olyan tagállamával szemben, amelyet a módosítás nem köt.

IX. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény bármely részére vagy részeire vonatkozó módosító eljárás

1. A jelen Egyezmény bármely Szerződő Fél javaslatára ezen cikkben meghatározott eljárások egyikével módosítható.

2. Módosítás a Szervezet keretében történt megvizsgálás után:

a) A Szervezet bármelyik Szerződő Fél kérelme alapján, a jelen Egyezményhez javasolt bármely módosítást megvizsgál. Ha ezt a módosítást a Szervezet Tengerészeti Biztonsági Bizottságában - ahová részvétel és szavazás céljából minden egyes Szerződő Felet meghívnak - a jelenlevők és szavazók kétharmados többséggel elfogadják, úgy ezt a Szervezet minden tagjának és minden Szerződő Félnek - legalább hat hónappal a Szervezet Közgyűlése által történő megvizsgálás előtt - megküldik. Bármely Szerződő Fél, amely nem tagja a Szervezetnek, jogosult a Szervezet módosítást tárgyaló Közgyűlésének munkájában való részvételre és a szavazásra.

b) Ha a Közgyűlésen a jelen levők és szavazók kétharmados többsége a módosítást elfogadta, és ha ez a többség magában foglalja a jelen levő és szavazó Szerződő Felek kétharmados többségét is, a Szervezet a módosítást elfogadás céljából valamennyi Szerződő Félnek megküldi.

c) Az ilyen módosítás a Szerződő Felek kétharmada által történt elfogadását követő tizenkét hónap eltelte után lép hatályba. A módosítás minden Szerződő Félre vonatkozóan hatályba lép, kivéve azokat, akik a hatálybalépést megelőzően olyan nyilatkozatot tesznek, hogy a módosítást nem fogadják el.

3. Módosítás konferencia összehívása útján:

Bármely Szerződő Fél kérésére - ha azzal a Szerződő Feleknek legalább egyharmada egyetért - a Főtitkár konferenciát hív egybe, amelyre meghívja a VII. Cikkben megjelölt államokat.

X. Cikk

Különleges eljárás a mellékletek módosítására

1. A mellékletekre vonatkozó és bármely Szerződő Fél által javasolt minden módosítást e Fél kérésére a Szervezet megvizsgál.

2. Ha ezt a módosítást a Szervezet Tengerészeti Biztonsági Bizottságában - ahová részvétel és szavazás céljából minden egyes Szerződő Felet meghívnak - a jelenlevők és szavazók kétharmados többséggel elfogadják, és ha ez a többség magában foglalja a jelen levő és szavazó Szerződő Felek kétharmados többségét is, a Főtitkár a módosítást elfogadás céljából valamennyi Szerződő Félnek megküldi.

3. Az ilyen módosítás abban az időpontban lép hatályba, amelyet a Tengerészeti Biztonsági Bizottság a módosítás elfogadásakor meghatározott, hacsak a Tengerészeti Biztonsági Bizottság által ugyanakkor meghatározott korábbi időpontig a Főtitkár nem kap olyan értesítést a Szerződő Felek egyötödétől, vagy - ha ez kevesebb - öt Szerződő Féltől, hogy a módosítással szemben ellenvetésük van. A Tengerészeti Biztonsági Bizottság az ebben a pontban hivatkozott időpontokra vonatkozó határozatát a jelenlevők és szavazók kétharmados többségével hozza meg úgy, hogy ennek a többségnek magában kell foglalnia a jelen levő és szavazó Szerződő Felek kétharmados többségét is.

4. Bármely módosítás hatálybalépése - mindazokra a Szerződő Felekre nézve, amelyek a módosítást nem ellenezték - minden előző rendelkezést felvált és hatálytalanít; bármely Szerződő Fél által a módosítással szemben tett ellenvetés a többi Szerződő Félre - a jelen Egyezmény hatálya alá eső konténerek elfogadását illetően - nem kötelező.

5. A Főtitkár a jelen cikkel kapcsolatos minden kérelemről és közlésről, valamint a módosítások hatálybalépésének időpontjáról a Szerződő Feleket és a Szervezet minden tagját értesíti.

6. Ha a mellékletekkel kapcsolatos módosító javaslatot a Tengerészeti Biztonsági Bizottság megvizsgálta, de nem fogadta el, bármely Szerződő Fél kérheti értekezlet összehívását, amelyre a VII. Cikkben megjelölt minden államot meg kell hívni. Ha a Szerződő Felek legalább egyharmada közölte egyetértését, a Főtitkár a mellékletek módosításának megvizsgálására értekezletet hív össze.

XI. Cikk

Felmondás

1. A jelen Egyezményt a Főtitkárnál letétbe helyezett okirattal bármely Szerződő Fél felmondhatja. A felmondás az ilyen bejelentésnek a Főtitkárnál történő letétbe helyezését követő egy év után lép hatályba.

2. Az a Szerződő Fél, amelyik a mellékletek módosításával szemben ellenvetést tett, a jelen Egyezményt felmondhatja, és az ilyen felmondás a szóban forgó módosítás hatálybalépésének időpontjában válik érvényessé.

XII. Cikk

Az Egyezmény megszűnése

A jelen Egyezmény megszűnik, ha a Szerződő Felek száma egymást követő tizenkét hónapon keresztül ötnél kevesebb.

XIII. Cikk

A viták rendezése

1. Ha két vagy több Szerződő Fél között, a jelen Egyezmény értelmezését vagy alkalmazását érintő olyan vita támad, amelyet tárgyalással vagy egyéb elintézési módon az érintettek nem tudnak rendezni, bármelyikük kérésére a vita az alábbi összetételű választottbírósághoz utalható: a vitában részt vevő mindegyik Fél kijelöl egy választottbírót, és ez a két választottbíró egy harmadikat jelöl ki elnöknek. Ha az egyik fél kérésének kézhezvételét követő három hónapon belül valamelyik fél a választottbírót nem jelölte ki, vagy ha a választottbíráknak nem sikerül elnököt választani, bármelyik fél felkérheti a Főtitkárt a választottbíróság bírájának vagy elnökének kijelölésére.

2. Az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései szerint megalakított választottbíróság döntése a vitában részt vevő felek részére kötelező érvényű.

3. A választottbíróság eljárási szabályait maga állapítja meg.

4. A választottbíróság eljárását és üléseinek helyét illető döntéseit - ugyanúgy, mint az eléje terjesztett bármely vitás ügy feletti döntést - szótöbbséggel hozza meg.

5. A választottbíróság ítéletének értelmezésével és végrehajtásával kapcsolatban a felek között felmerülő bármely vitás kérdést a felek bármelyike elbírálásra az ítéletet hozó választottbíróság elé terjesztheti.

XIV. Cikk

Fenntartások

1. A jelen Egyezménnyel kapcsolatban fenntartások tehetők, kivéve az I-IV. és a XIII. Cikkek és a jelen cikk rendelkezéseit, valamint a mellékletek előírásait, feltéve, hogy az ilyen fenntartásokat írásban és a megerősítésről, elfogadásról, jóváhagyásról vagy csatlakozásról szóló okirat letétbe helyezése előtt közlik és ebben az okiratban megerősítik. A Főtitkárnak az ilyen fenntartásokat a VII. Cikkben megjelölt minden állammal közölnie kell.

2. Az 1. bekezdésnek megfelelően tett minden fenntartás:

a) a fenntartással élő Szerződő Fél tekintetében a jelen Egyezménynek a fenntartással érintett rendelkezéseit a fenntartás mértékéig módosítja, és

b) ugyanilyen mértékben módosítja ezeket a rendelkezéseket a többi Szerződő Fél és a fenntartást tevő Szerződő Fél viszonylatában.

3. Bármely Szerződő Fél, amely az 1. bekezdés szerint fenntartással élt, azt a Főtitkárhoz intézett közléssel bármikor visszavonhatja.

XV. Cikk

Értesítések

A IX., X. és XIV. Cikkek szerinti bejelentéseken és közléseken kívül a Főtitkárnak a VII. Cikkben megjelölt valamennyi állammal közölnie kell a következőket:

a) a VII. Cikk alapján történt aláírásokat, megerősítéseket, elfogadásokat, jóváhagyásokat és csatlakozásokat;

b) a jelen Egyezmény VIII. Cikk szerinti hatálybalépésének időpontját;

c) a jelen Egyezmény IX. és X. Cikkek szerinti módosításai hatálybalépésének időpontját;

d) a XI. Cikk alapján történt felmondásokat;

e) a jelen Egyezmény XII. Cikk alapján történt megszűnését.

XVI. Cikk

Hiteles szövegek

A jelen Egyezmény eredeti példánya - amelynek angol, francia, kínai, orosz és spanyol nyelvű változata egyaránt hiteles - a Főtitkárnál kerül letétbe helyezésre, akinek arról a VII. Cikkben meghatározott valamennyi állam részére hiteles másolatot kell küldenie.

Melynek bizonyságául a Kormányaik által erre kellően felhatalmazott alulírott teljhatalmú képviselők aláírták a jelen Egyezményt.

Készült Genfben, ezerkilencszázhetvenkettő december hó második napján.”

3. § (1) A törvény végrehajtásáról a gazdasági és közlekedési miniszter gondoskodik.

(2) Felhatalmazást kap a gazdasági és közlekedési miniszter, hogy az Egyezmény mellékleteit, azok módosításait, illetve kiegészítéseit rendeletben hirdesse ki.

4. § Ez a törvény a kihirdetését követő 8. napon lép hatályba, egyidejűleg a Nemzetközi Szállítótartály Biztonsági Egyezmény kihirdetéséről szóló 1977. évi 20. törvényerejű rendelet hatályát veszti.