2003. évi XXXIV. törvény

az áruknak TIR-igazolvánnyal történő nemzetközi fuvarozására vonatkozó, Genfben, 1975. november 14-én kelt vámegyezmény és módosításai egységes szerkezetben történő kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés az áruknak TIR-igazolvánnyal történő nemzetközi fuvarozására vonatkozó, Genfben, 1975. november 14. napján kelt vámegyezménynek (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) az 1988. február 23-án, 1993. március 24-én, 1997. június 26-27-én és 2000. október 19-20-án elfogadott módosításokkal egységes szerkezetbe foglalt szövegét e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

2. § Az Egyezmény egységes eredeti angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„Convention on the international transport of goods under cover of TIR Carnets

TIR Convention, 1975

the Contracting Parties,

desiring to facilitate the international carriage of goods by road vehicle,

considering that the improvement of the conditions of transport constitutes one of the factors essential to the development of co-operation among them,

declaring themselves in favour of a simplification and a harmonization of administrative formalities in the field of international transport, in particular at frontiers,

have agreed as follows:

Chapter I

GENERAL

a) Definitions

Article 1

For the purposes of this Convention:

a) the term „TIR transport” shall mean the transport of goods from a Customs office of departure to a Customs office of destination under the procedure, called the TIR procedure, laid down in this Convention;

b) the term „TIR operation” shall mean the part of a TIR transport that is carried out in a Contracting Party from a Customs office of departure or entry (en route) to a Customs office of destination or exit (en route);

c) the term „start of a TIR operation” shall mean that the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container have been presented for purposes of control to the Customs office of departure or entry (en route) together with the load and the TIR Carnet relating thereto and that the TIR Carnet has been accepted by the Customs office;

d) the term „termination of a TIR operation” shall mean that the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container have been presented for purposes of control to the Customs office of destination or of exit (en route) together with the load and the TIR Carnet relating thereto;

e) the term „discharge of a TIR operation” shall mean the recognition by Customs authorities that the TIR operation has been terminated correctly in a Contracting Party. This is established by the Customs authorities on the basis of a comparison of the data or information available at the Customs office of destination or exit (en route) and that available at the Customs office of departure or entry (en route);

f) the term „import or export duties and taxes” shall mean Customs duties and all other duties, taxes, fees and other charges which are collected on, or in connection with, the import or export of goods, but not including fees and charges limited in amount to the approximate cost of services rendered;

g) the term „road vehicle” shall mean not only any power-driven road vehicle but also any trailer or semi-trailer designed to be coupled thereto;

h) the term „combination of vehicles” shall mean coupled vehicles which travel on the road as a unit;

j) the term „container” shall mean an Article of transport equipment (liftvan, movable tank or other similar structure):

(i) fully or partially enclosed to constitute a compartment intended for containing goods,

(ii) of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use,

(iii) specially designed to facilitate the transport of goods by one or more modes of transport without intermediate reloading,

(iv) designed for ready handling, particularly when being transferred from one mode of transport to another,

(v) designed to be easy to fill and to empty, and

(vi) having an internal volume of one cubic metre or more,

„demountable bodies” are to be treated as containers;

k) the term „Customs office of departure” shall mean any Customs office of a Contracting Party where the TIR transport of a load or part load of goods begins;

l) the term „Customs office of destination” shall mean any Customs office of a Contracting Party where the TIR transport of a load or part load of goods ends;

m) the term „Customs office en route” shall mean any Customs office of a Contracting Party through which a road vehicle, combination of vehicles or container enters or leaves this Contracting Party in the course of a TIR transport;

n) the term „person” shall mean both natural and legal persons;

o) the term „holder” of a TIR Carnet shall mean the person to whom a TIR Carnet has been issued in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Convention and on whose behalf a Customs declaration has been made in the form of a TIR Carnet indicating a wish to place goods under the TIR procedure at the Customs office of departure. He shall be responsible for presentation of the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container together with the load and the TIR Carnet relating thereto at the Customs office of departure, the Customs office en route and the Customs office of destination and for due observance of the other relevant provisions of the Convention;

p) the term „heavy or bulky goods” shall mean any heavy or bulky object which because of its weight, size or nature is not normally carried in a closed vehicle or closed container;

q) the term „guaranteeing association” shall mean an association approved by the Customs authorities of a Contracting Party to act as surety for persons using the TIR procedure.

b) Scope

Article 2

This Convention shall apply to the transport of goods without intermediate reloading, in road vehicles, combinations of vehicles or in containers, across one or more frontiers between a Customs office of departure of one Contracting Party and a Customs office of destination of an other or of the same Contracting Party, provided that some portion of the journey between the beginning and the end of the TIR transport is made by road.

Article 3

For the provisions of this Convention to become applicable:

a) the transport operation must be performed

(i) by means of road vehicles, combinations of vehicles or containers previously approved under the conditions set forth in Chapter III a), or

(ii) by means of other road vehicles, other combinations of vehicles or other containers under the conditions set forth in Chapter III c), or

(iii) by road vehicles or special vehicles such as buses, cranes, sweepers, concrete-laying machines, etc. exported and therefore themselves considered as goods travelling by their own means from a Customs office of departure to a Customs office of destination under the conditions set forth in Chapter III c). In case such vehicles are carrying other goods, the conditions as referred to under (i) or (ii) above shall apply accordingly;

b) the transport operations must be guaranteed by associations approved in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 and must be performed under cover of a TIR Carnet, which shall conform to the model reproduced in Annex 1 to this Convention.

c) Principles

Article 4

Goods carried under the TIR procedure shall not be subjected to the payment or deposit of import or export duties and taxes at Customs offices en route.

Article 5

1. Goods carried under the TIR procedure in sealed road vehicles, combinations of vehicles or containers shall not as a general rule be subjected to examination at Customs offices en route.

2. However, to prevent abuses, Customs authorities may in exceptional cases, and particularly when irregularity is suspected, carry out an examination of the goods at such offices.

Chapter II

ISSUE OF TIR CARNETS

Liability of guaranteeing associations

Article 6

1. Each Contracting Party may authorize associations to issue TIR Carnets, either directly or through corresponding associations, and to act as guarantors, as long as the minimum conditions and requirements, as laid down in Annex 9, Part I, are complied with. The authorization shall be revoked if the minimum conditions and requirements contained in Annex 9, Part I are no longer fulfilled.

2. An association shall not be approved in any country unless its guarantee also covers the liabilities incurred in that country in connection with operations under cover of TIR Carnets issued by foreign associations affiliated to the same international organization as that to which it is itself affiliated.

2. bis. An international organization, as referred to in paragraph 2, shall be authorized by the Administrative Committee to take on responsibility for the effective organization and functioning of an international guarantee system provided that it accepts this responsibility.

3. An association shall issue TIR Carnets only to persons, whose access to the TIR procedure has not been refused by the competent authorities of Contracting Parties in which the person is resident or established.

4. Authorization for access to the TIR procedure shall be granted only to persons who fulfil the minimum conditions and requirements laid down in Annex 9, Part II to this Convention. Without prejudice to Article 38, the authorization shall be revoked if the fulfilment of these criteria is no longer ensured.

5. Authorization for access to the TIR procedure shall be granted according to the procedure laid down in Annex 9, Part II to this Convention.

Article 7

TIR Carnet forms sent to the guaranteeing associations by the corresponding foreign associations or by international organizations shall not be liable to import and export duties and taxes and shall be free of import and export prohibitions and restrictions.

Article 8

1. The guaranteeing association shall undertake to pay the import or export duties and taxes, together with any default interest, due under the Customs laws and regulations of the country in which an irregularity has been noted in connection with a TIR operation. It shall be liable, jointly and severally with the persons from whom the sums mentioned above are due, for payment of such sums.

2. In cases where the laws and regulations of a Contracting Party do not provide for payment of import or export duties and taxes as provided for in paragraph 1 above, the guaranteeing association shall undertake to pay, under the same conditions, a sum equal to the amount of the import or export duties and taxes and any default interest.

3. Each Contracting Party shall determine the maximum sum per TIR Carnet, which may be claimed from the guaranteeing association on the basis of the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 above.

4. The liability of the guaranteeing association to the authorities of the country where the Customs office of departure is situated shall commence at the time when the TIR Carnet is accepted by the Customs office. In the succeeding countries through which goods are transported under the TIR procedure, this liability shall commence at the time when the goods enter these countries or, where the TIR transport has been suspended under Article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, at the time when the TIR Carnet is accepted by the Customs office where the TIR transport is resumed.

5. The liability of the guaranteeing association shall cover not only the goods which are enumerated in the TIR Carnet but also any goods which, though not enumerated therein, may be contained in the sealed section of the road vehicle or in the sealed container. It shall not extend to any other goods.

6. For the purpose of determining the duties and taxes mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the particulars of the goods as entered in the TIR Carnet shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be assumed to be correct.

7. When payment of sums mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article becomes due, the competent authorities shall so far as possible require payment from the person or persons directly liable before making a claim against the guaranteeing association.

Article 9

1. The guaranteeing association shall fix the period of validity of the TIR Carnet by specifying a final date of validity after which the Carnet may not be presented for acceptance at the Customs office of departure.

2. Provided that it has been accepted by the Customs office of departure on or before the final date of validity, as provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Carnet shall remain valid until the termination of the TIR operation at the Customs office of destination.

Article 10

1. Discharge of a TIR operation has to take place without delay.

2. When the Customs authorities of a country have discharged a TIR operation they can no longer claim from the guaranteeing association payment of the sums mentioned in Article 8, paragraphs 1 and 2, unless the certificate of termination of the TIR operation was obtained in an improper or fraudulent manner or no termination has taken place.

Article 11

1. Where a TIR operation has not been discharged, the competent authorities shall not have the right to claim payment of the sums mentioned in Article 8, paragraphs 1 and 2, from the guaranteeing association unless, within a period of one year from the date of acceptance of the TIR Carnet by those authorities, they have notified the association in writing of the non-discharge. The same provision shall apply where the certificate of termination of the TIR operation was obtained in an improper or fraudulent manner, save that the period shall be two years.

2. The claim for payment of the sums referred to in Article 8, paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be made to the guaranteeing association at the earliest three months after the date on which the association was informed that the operation had not been discharged or that the certificate of termination of the TIR operation had been obtained in an improper or fraudulent manner and at the latest not more than two years after that date. However, in cases which, during the above-mentioned period of two years, become the subject of legal proceedings, any claim for payment shall be made within one year of the date on which the decision of the court becomes enforceable.

3. The guaranteeing association shall have a period of three months, from the date when a claim for payment is made upon it, in which to pay the amounts claimed. The sums paid shall be reimbursed to the association if, within the two years following the date on which the claim for payment was made, it has been established to the satisfaction of the Customs authorities that no irregularity was committed in connection with the transport operation in question.

Chapter III

TRANSPORT OF GOODS UNDER TIR CARNET

a) Approval of vehicles and containers

Article 12

In order to fall within the provisions of sections a) and b) of this Chapter, every road vehicle must as regards its construction and equipment fulfil the conditions set out in Annex 2 to this Convention and must have been approved according to the procedure laid down in Annex 3 to this Convention. The Certificate of Approval shall conform to the specimen reproduced in Annex 4.

Article 13

1. To fall within the provisions of sections a) and b) of this Chapter, containers must be constructed in conformity with the conditions laid down in Part I of Annex 7 and must have been approved according to the procedure laid down in Part II of that Annex.

2. Containers approved for the transport of goods under Customs seal in accordance with the Customs Convention on Containers, 1956, the agreements arising there from concluded under the auspices of the United Nations, the Customs Convention on Containers, 1972 or any international instruments that may supersede or modify the latter Convention, shall be considered as complying with the provisions of paragraph 1 above and must be accepted for transport under the TIR procedure without further approval.

Article 14

1. Each Contracting Party reserves the right to refuse to recognize the validity of the approval of road vehicles or containers which do not meet the conditions set forth in Articles 12 and 13 above. Nevertheless, Contracting Parties shall avoid delaying traffic when the defects found are of minor importance and do not involve any risk of smuggling.

2. Before it is used again for the transport of goods under Customs seal, any road vehicle or container which no longer meets the conditions which justified its approval, shall be either restored to its original state, or presented for re-approval.

b) Procedure for transport under cover of a TIR Carnet

Article 15

1. No special Customs documents shall be required in respect of the temporary importation of a road vehicle, combination of vehicles or container carrying goods under cover of the TIR procedure. No guarantee shall be required for the road vehicle or combination of vehicles or container.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not prevent a Contracting Party from requiring the fulfilment at the Customs office of destination of the formalities laid down by its national regulations to ensure that, once the TIR operation has been completed, the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container will be re-exported.

Article 16

When a road vehicle or combination of vehicles is carrying out a TIR transport, one rectangular plate bearing the inscription „TIR” and conforming to the specifications given in Annex 5 to this Convention, shall be affixed to the front and another to the rear of the road vehicle or combination of vehicles. These plates shall be so placed as to be clearly visible. They shall be removable or be fitted or designed in such a way that these plates can be reversed, covered, folded or indicate in any other manner that a TIR transport is not carried out.

Article 17

1. A single TIR Carnet shall be made out in respect of each road vehicle or container. However, a single TIR Carnet may be made out in respect of a combination of vehicles or for several containers loaded on to a single road vehicle or on to a combination of vehicles. In that case the TIR manifest of the goods covered by the TIR Carnet shall list separately the contents of each vehicle in the combination of vehicles or of each container.

2. The TIR Carnet shall be valid for one journey only. It shall contain at least the number of detachable vouchers which are necessary for the TIR transport in question.

Article 18

A TIR transport may involve several Customs offices of departure and destination, but the total number of Customs offices of departure and destination shall not exceed four. The TIR Carnet may only be presented to Customs offices of destination if all Customs offices of departure have accepted the TIR Carnet.

Article 19

The goods and the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container shall be produced with the TIR Carnet at the Customs office of departure. The Customs authorities of the country of departure shall take such measures as are necessary for satisfying themselves as to the accuracy of the goods manifest and either for affixing the Customs seals or for checking Customs seals affixed under the responsibility of the said Customs authorities by duly authorized persons.

Article 20

For journeys in the territory of their country, the Customs authorities may fix a time-limit and require the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container to follow a prescribed route.

Article 21

At each Customs office en route and at Customs offices of destination, the road vehicle, the combination of vehicles or the container shall be produced for purposes of control to the Customs authorities together with the load and the TIR Carnet relating thereto.

Article 22

1. As a general rule and except when they examine the goods in accordance with Article 5, paragraph 2, the Customs authorities of the Customs offices en route of each of the Contracting Parties shall accept the Customs seals of other Contracting Parties, provided that they are intact. The said Customs authorities may, however, if control requirements make it necessary, add their own seals.

2. The Customs seals thus accepted by a Contracting Party shall have in the territory of that Contracting Party the benefit of the same legal protection as is accorded to the national seals.

Article 23

The Customs authorities shall not:

- require road vehicles, combinations of vehicles or containers to be escorted at the carriers’ expense on the territory of their country,

- require examination en route of road vehicles, combinations of vehicles or containers and their loads except in special cases.

Article 24

If the Customs authorities conduct an examination of the load of a road vehicle, combination of vehicles or the container in the course of the journey or at a Customs office en route, they shall record on the TIR Carnet vouchers used in their country, on the corresponding counterfoils, and on the vouchers remaining in the TIR Carnet, particulars of the new seals affixed and of the controls carried out.

Article 25

If the Customs seals are broken en route otherwise than in the circumstances of Articles 24 and 35, or if any goods are destroyed or damaged without breaking of such seals, the procedure laid down in Annex 1 to this Convention for the use of the TIR Carnet shall, without prejudice to the possible application of the provisions of national law, be followed and the certified report in the TIR Carnet shall be completed.

Article 26

1. When transport under cover of a TIR Carnet takes place in part in the territory of a State which is not a Contracting Party to this Convention, the TIR transport shall be suspended during that part of the journey. In that case, the Customs authorities of the Contracting Party on whose territory the journey continues shall accept the TIR Carnet for the resumption of the TIR transport, provided that the Customs seals and/or identifying marks have remained intact.

2. The same shall apply where for a part of the journey the TIR Carnet is not used by the holder of the Carnet in the territory of a Contracting Party because of the existence of simpler Customs transit procedures or when the use of a Customs transit regime is not necessary.

3. In such cases the Customs offices where the TIR transport is suspended or resumed shall be deemed to be Customs offices of exit en route and Customs offices of entry en route respectively.

Article 27

Subject to the provisions of this Convention and in particular of Article 18, another Customs office of destination may be substituted for a Customs office of destination originally indicated.

Article 28

1. Termination of a TIR operation shall be certified by the Customs authorities without delay. Termination of a TIR operation may be certified without or with reservation: where termination is certified with reservation this shall be on account of facts connected with the TIR operation itself. These facts shall be clearly indicated in the TIR Carnet.

2. In cases where the goods are placed under another Customs procedure or another system of Customs control, all irregularities that may be committed under that other Customs procedure or system of Customs control shall not be attributed to the TIR Carnet holder as such or any person acting on his behalf.

c) Provisions concerning transport of he avy or bulky goods

Article 29

1. The provisions of this section apply only to the transport of heavy or bulky goods as defined in Article 1, subparagraph p), of this Convention.

2. Where the provisions of this section apply, heavy or bulky goods may, if the authorities at the Customs office of departure so decide, be carried by means of non-sealed vehicles or containers.

3. The provisions of this section shall apply only if, in the opinion of the authorities at the Customs office of departure, the heavy or bulky goods carried and any accessories carried with them can be easily identified by reference to the description given, or can be provided with Customs seals and/or identifying marks so as to prevent any substitution, or removal of the goods, without it being obvious.

Article 30

All the provisions of this Convention, save those to which the special provisions of this section make an exception, shall apply to the transport of heavy or bulky goods under the TIR procedure.

Article 31

The liability of the guaranteeing association shall cover not only the goods enumerated in the TIR Carnet, but also any goods which, though not enumerated in the Carnet, are on the load platform or among the goods enumerated in the TIR Carnet.

Article 32

The cover and all vouchers of the TIR Carnet shall bear the endorsement „heavy or bulky goods” in bold letters in English or in French.

Article 33

The authorities at the Customs office of departure may require such packing lists, photographs, drawings, etc., as are necessary for the identification of the goods carried to be appended to the TIR Carnet. In this case they shall endorse these documents, one copy of the said documents shall be attached to the inside of the cover page of the TIR Carnet, and all the manifests of the TIR Carnet shall include a reference to such documents.

Article 34

The authorities at the Customs offices en route of each of the Contracting Parties shall accept the Customs seals and/or identifying marks affixed by the competent authorities of other Contracting Parties. They may, however, affix additional seals and/or identifying marks; they shall record particulars of the new seals and/or identifying marks on the vouchers of the TIR Carnet used in their country, on the corresponding counterfoils and on the vouchers remaining in the TIR Carnet.

Article 35

If Customs authorities conducting an examination of the load at a Customs office en route or in the course of the journey are obliged to break seals and/or remove identifying marks, they shall record the new seals and/or identifying marks on the vouchers of the TIR Carnet used in their country, on the corresponding counterfoils and on the vouchers remaining in the TIR Carnet.

Chapter IV

IRREGULARITIES

Article 36

Any breach of the provisions of this Convention shall render the offender liable, in the country where the offence was committed, to the penalties prescribed by the law of that country.

Article 37

When it is not possible to establish in which territory an irregularity was committed, it shall be deemed to have been committed in the territory of the Contracting Party where it is detected.

Article 38

1. Each of the Contracting Parties shall have the right to exclude temporarily or permanently from the operation of this Convention any person guilty of a serious offence against the Customs laws or regulations applicable to the international transport of goods.

2. This exclusion shall be notified within one week to the competent authorities of the Contracting Party on whose territory the person concerned is established or resident, to the association(s) in the country or Customs territory where the offence has been committed and to the TIR Executive Board.

Article 39

When TIR operations are accepted as being otherwise in order:

1. The Contracting Parties shall disregard minor discrepancies in the observance of time-limits or routes prescribed.

2. Likewise, discrepancies between the particulars on the goods manifest of the TIR Carnet and the actual contents of a road vehicle, combination of vehicles or container shall not be considered as infringements of the Convention by the holder of the TIR Carnet when evidence is produced to the satisfaction of the competent authorities that these discrepancies were not due to mistakes committed knowingly or through negligence at the time when the goods were loaded or dispatched or when the manifest was made out.

Article 40

The Customs administrations of the countries of departure and of destination shall not consider the holder of the TIR Carnet responsible for the discrepancies which may be discovered in those countries, when the discrepancies in fact relate to the Customs procedures which preceded or followed a TIR transport and in which the holder was not involved.

Article 41

When it is established to the satisfaction of the Customs authorities that goods specified on the manifest of a TIR Carnet have been destroyed or have been irrecoverably lost by accident or force majeure or that they are short by reason of their nature, payment of the duties and taxes normally due shall be waived.

Article 42

On receipt from a Contracting Party for a request giving the relevant reasons, the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties concerned in a TIR transport shall furnish that Contracting Party with all the available information needed for implementation of the provisions of Articles 39, 40 and 41 above.

Article 42 bis

The competent authorities, in close cooperation with the associations, shall take all necessary measures to ensure the proper use of TIR Carnets. To this effect they may take appropriate national and international control measures. National control measures taken in this context by the competent authorities shall be communicated immediately to the TIR Executive Board which will examine their conformity with the provisions of the Convention. International control measures shall be adopted by the Administrative Committee.

Chapter V

EXPLANATORY NOTES

Article 43

The Explanatory Notes set out in Annex 6 and Annex 7, Part III, interpret certain provisions of this Convention and its Annexes. They also describe certain recommended practices.

Chapter VI

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Article 44

Each Contracting Party shall provide the guaranteeing associations concerned with facilities for:

a) the transfer of the currency necessary for the sums claimed by the authorities of Contracting Parties by virtue of the provisions of Article 8 of this Convention; and

b) the transfer of currency for payment for TIR Carnet forms sent to the guaranteeing associations by the corresponding foreign associations or by the international organizations.

Article 45

Each Contracting Party shall cause to be published the list of the Customs offices of departure, Customs offices en route and Customs offices of destination approved by it for accomplishing TIR operations. The Contracting Parties of adjacent territories shall consult each other to agree upon corresponding frontier offices and upon their opening hours.

Article 46

1. No charge shall be made for Customs attendance in connection with the Customs operations mentioned in this Convention, save where it is provided on days or at times or places other than those normally appointed for such operations.

2. Contracting Parties shall arrange to the fullest extent possible for Customs operations concerning perishable goods at Customs offices to be facilitated.

Article 47

1. The provisions of this Convention shall preclude neither the application of restrictions and controls imposed under national regulations on grounds of public morality, public security, hygiene or public health, or for veterinary or phytopathological reasons, nor the levy of dues chargeable by virtue of such regulations.

2. The provisions of this Convention shall not preclude the application of other provisions either national or international governing transport.

Article 48

Nothing in this Convention shall prevent Contracting Parties which form a Customs or Economic Union from enacting special provisions in respect of transport operations commencing or terminating, or passing through, their territories, provided that such provisions do not attenuate the facilities provided for by this Convention.

Article 49

This Convention shall not prevent the application of greater facilities which Contracting Parties grant or may wish to grant either by unilateral provisions or by virtue of bilateral or multilateral agreements provided that such facilities do not impede the application of the provisions of this Convention, and in particular, TIR operations.

Article 50

The Contracting Parties shall communicate to one another, on request, information necessary for implementing the provisions of this Convention, and particularly information relating to the approval of road vehicles or containers and to the technical characteristics of their design.

Article 51

The Annexes to this Convention form an integral part of the Convention.

Chapter VII

FINAL CLAUSES

Article 52

Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval and accession

1. All States Members of the United Nations or members of any of the specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency or Parties to the Statute of the International Court of Justice, and any other State invited by the General Assembly of the United Nations, may become Contracting Parties to this Convention:

a) by signing it without reservation of ratification, acceptance or approval;

b) by depositing an instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval after signing it subject to ratification, acceptance or approval; or

c) by depositing an instrument of accession.

2. This Convention shall be open from 1 January 1976 until 31 December 1976 inclusive for signature at the Office of the United Nations at Geneva by the States referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article. Thereafter it shall be open for their accession.

3. Customs or economic unions may, together with all their member States or at any time after all their member States have become Contracting Parties to this Convention, also become Contracting Parties to this Convention in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. However, these unions shall not have the right to vote.

4. The instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Article 53

Entry into force

1. This Convention shall enter into force six months after the date on which five States referred to in Article 52, paragraph 1, have signed it without reservation of ratification, acceptance or approval or have deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

2. After five States referred to in Article 52, paragraph 1, have signed it without reservation of ratification, acceptance or approval, or have deposited their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, this Convention shall enter into force for further Contracting Parties six months after the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

3. Any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession deposited after the entry into force of an amendment to this Convention shall be deemed to apply to this Convention as amended.

4. Any such instrument deposited after an amendment has been accepted but before it has entered into force shall be deemed to apply to this Convention as amended on the date when the amendment enters into force.

Article 54

Denunciation

1. Any Contracting Party may denounce this Convention by so notifying the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

2. Denunciation shall take effect fifteen months after the date of receipt by the Secretary-General of the notification of denunciation.

3. The validity of TIR Carnets accepted by the Customs office of departure before the date when the denunciation takes effect shall not be affected thereby and the guarantee of the guaranteeing association shall hold good in accordance with the provisions of this Convention.

Article 55

Termination

If, after the entry into force of this Convention, the number of States which are Contracting Parties is for any period of twelve consecutive months reduced to less than five, the Convention shall cease to have effect from the end of the twelve-month period.

Article 56

Termination of the operation of the TIR Convention, 1959

1. Upon its entry into force, this Convention shall terminate and replace, in relations between the Contracting Parties to this Convention, the TIR Convention, 1959.

2. Certificates of approval issued in respect of road vehicles and containers under the conditions of the TIR Convention, 1959, shall be accepted during the period of their validity or any extension thereof for the transport of goods under Customs seal by Contracting Parties to this Convention, provided that such vehicles and containers continue to fulfil the conditions under which they were originally approved.

Article 57

Settlement of disputes

1. Any dispute between two or more Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention shall, so far as possible be settled by negotiation between them or other means of settlement.

2. Any dispute between two or more Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Convention which cannot be settled by the means indicated in paragraph 1 of this Article shall, at the request of one of them, be referred to an arbitration tribunal composed as follows: each Party to the dispute shall appoint an arbitrator and these arbitrators shall appoint another arbitrator, who shall be chairman. If, three months after receipt of a request, one of the Parties has failed to appoint an arbitrator or if the arbitrators have failed to elect the chairman, any of the Parties may request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to appoint an arbitrator or the chairman of the arbitration tribunal.

3. The decision of the arbitration tribunal established under the provisions of paragraph 2 shall be binding on the Parties to the dispute.

4. The arbitration tribunal shall determine its own rules of procedure.

5. Decisions of the arbitration tribunal shall be taken by majority vote.

6. Any controversy which may arise between the Parties to the dispute as regards the interpretation and execution of the award may be submitted by any of the Parties for judgment to the arbitration tribunal which made the award.

Article 58

Reservations

1. Any State may, at the time of signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, declare that it does not consider itself bound by Article 57, paragraphs 2 to 6, of this Convention. Other Contracting Parties shall not be bound by these paragraphs in respect of any Contracting Party which has entered such a reservation.

2. Any Contracting Party having entered a reservation as provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article may at any time withdraw such reservation by notifying the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

3. Apart from the reservations provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, no reservation to this Convention shall be permitted.

Article 58 bis

Administrative Committee

An Administrative Committee composed of all the Contracting Parties shall be established. Its composition, functions and rules of procedure are set out in Annex 8.

Article 58 ter

TIR Executive Board

The Administrative Committee shall establish a TIR Executive Board as a subsidiary body which will, on its behalf, fulfil the tasks entrusted to it by the Convention and by the Committee. Its composition, functions and rules of procedure are set out in Annex 8.

Article 59

Procedure for amending this Convention

1. This Convention, including its Annexes, may be amended upon the proposal of a Contracting Party by the procedure specified in this Article.

2. Any proposed amendment to this Convention shall be considered by the Administrative Committee composed of all the Contracting Parties in accordance with the rules of procedure set out in Annex 8. Any such amendment considered or prepared during the meeting of the Administrative Committee and adopted by it by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting shall be communicated by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the Contracting Parties for their acceptance.

3. Except as provided for under Article 60, any proposed amendment communicated in accordance with the preceding paragraph shall come into force with respect to all Contracting Parties three months after the expiry of a period of twelve months following the date of communication of the proposed amendment during which period no objection to the proposed amendment has been communicated to the Secretary-General of the United Nations by a State which is a Contracting Party.

4. If an objection to the proposed amendment has been communicated in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, the amendment shall be deemed not to have been accepted and shall have no effect whatsoever.

Article 60

Special procedure for amending Annexes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9

1. Any proposed amendment to Annexes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 considered in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 59 shall come into force on a date to be determined by the Administrative Committee at the time of its adoption, unless by a prior date determined by the Administrative Committee at the same time, one-fifth or five of the States which are Contracting Parties, whichever number is less, notify the Secretary-General of the United Nations of their objection to the amendment. Determination by the Administrative Committee of the dates referred to in this paragraph shall be by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting.

2. On entry into force, any amendment adopted in accordance with the procedures set out in paragraph 1 above shall for all Contracting Parties replace and supersede any previous provisions to which the amendment refers.

Article 61

Requests, communications and objections

The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all Contracting Parties and all States referred to in Article 52, paragraph 1, of this Convention of any request, communication or objection under Articles 59 and 60 above and of the date on which any amendment enters into force.

Article 62

Review Conference

1. Any State which is a Contracting Party may, by notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, request that a conference be convened for the purpose of reviewing this Convention.

2. A review conference to which all Contracting Parties and all States referred to in Article 52, paragraph 1, shall be invited, shall be convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations if, within a period of six months following the date of notification by the Secretary-General, not less than one-fourth of the States which are Contracting Parties notify him of their concurrence with the request.

3. A review conference to which all Contracting Parties and all States referred to in Article 52, paragraph 1, shall be invited shall also be convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations upon notification of a request by the Administrative Committee. The Administrative Committee shall make a request if agreed to by a majority of those present and voting in the Committee.

4. If a conference is convened in pursuance of paragraphs 1 or 3 of this Article, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall so advise all the Contracting Parties and invite them to submit, within a period of three months, the proposals which they wish the conference to consider. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall circulate to all Contracting Parties the provisional agenda for the conference, together with the texts of such proposals, at least three months before the date on which the conference is to meet.

Article 63

Notifications

In addition to the notifications and communications provided for in Articles 61 and 62, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify all the States referred to in Article 52 of the following:

a) signatures, ratifications, acceptances, approvals and accessions under Article 52;

b) the dates of entry into force of this Convention in accordance with Article 53;

c) denunciations under Article 54;

d) the termination of this Convention under Article 55;

e) reservations under Article 58.

Article 64

Authentic text

After 31 December 1976, the original of this Convention shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall transmit certified true copies to each of the Contracting Parties and to the States referred to in Article 52, paragraph 1, which are not Contracting Parties.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have signed this Convention.

DONE at Geneva, this fourteenth day of November one thousand nine hundred and seventy-five, in a single copy in the English, French and Russian languages, the three texts being equally authentic.

Áruknak TIR-igazolvánnyal történő nemzetközi fuvarozására vonatkozó vámegyezmény

TIR Egyezmény, 1975

a Szerződő Felek

kívánva a közúti járművel lebonyolított nemzetközi árufuvarozások egyszerűsítését,

figyelembe véve, hogy a fuvarozások feltételeinek javítása együttműködésük fejlesztésének egyik lényeges tényezője,

kinyilvánítva érdekeltségüket a nemzetközi szállításokkal kapcsolatos adminisztratív formaságok összhangba hozatalában és egyszerűsítésében, különösen a határokon,

megállapodtak az alábbiakban:

I. Fejezet

ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

a) Meghatározások

1. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásánál

a) „TIR-fuvarozás” kifejezés áruknak az indulási vámhivataltól a rendeltetési vámhivatalig, a jelen Egyezmény által létrehozott TIR-műveletnek nevezett eljárás szerinti fuvarozását jelenti;

b) a „TIR-eljárás” kifejezés a TIR-fuvarozásnak azt a részét jelenti, amely egy Szerződő Fél területén az indulási vagy beléptető (átmenő) vámhivataltól a rendeltetési vagy kiléptető (átmenő) vámhivatalig kerül végrehajtásra;

c) a „TIR-eljárás kezdete” kifejezés azt jelenti, hogy a közúti járművet, járműszerelvényt vagy szállítótartályt ellenőrzési céllal bemutatták az indulási vagy beléptető (átmenő) vámhivatalnak a rakománnyal, valamint a rá vonatkozó TIR-igazolvánnyal együtt, és a TIR-igazolványt a vámhivatal elfogadta;

d) a „TIR-eljárás befejezése” kifejezés azt jelenti, hogy a közúti járművet, járműszerelvényt vagy szállítótartályt ellenőrzési céllal bemutatták a rendeltetési vagy kiléptető (átmenő) vámhivatalnak a rakománnyal, valamint a rá vonatkozó TIR-igazolvánnyal együtt;

e) a „TIR-eljárás mentesítése” kifejezés azt jelenti, hogy a vámhatóságok elfogadták, hogy a TIR-eljárás szabályszerűen befejeződött a Szerződő Fél területén. Ezt a vámhatóságok azon adatok vagy információk összehasonlítása alapján állapítják meg, amelyek a rendeltetési vagy kiléptető (átmenő) vámhivatal és az indulási vagy beléptető (átmenő) vámhivatal rendelkezésére állnak;

f) a „behozatali vagy kiviteli vámok és illetékek” kifejezés jelenti az áruk importálásakor vagy exportálásakor, illetve ahhoz kapcsolódóan szedett vámokat és egyéb illetékeket, adókat és díjakat, azon díjak kivételével, amelyek összege a nyújtott szolgáltatások közelítő költségét nem haladja meg;

g) a „közúti jármű” kifejezés nem csupán a motorral ellátott közúti gépjárművet jelöli, hanem minden ahhoz való kapcsolás céljára készült pótkocsit vagy félpótkocsit is;

h) „járműszerelvény„-en olyan összekapcsolt járművek értendők, amelyek a közúti forgalomban egyetlen egységként vesznek részt;

j) „szállítótartály„-on olyan szállító berendezés (rakszekrény, felszerelhető tartály vagy hasonló szerkezet) értendő, amely

(i) áruk elhelyezésére szolgáló teljesen vagy részben zárt rekeszt képez,

(ii) állandó jellegű és ebből eredően kellő szilárdságú ahhoz, hogy ismételten felhasználható legyen,

(iii) kifejezetten abból a célból készült, hogy az áruknak egy vagy több szállítási mód igénybevételével történő, átrakás okozta megszakítástól mentes fuvarozását megkönnyítse,

(iv) úgy készült, hogy könnyen kezelhető legyen, különösen egyik szállítási módról a másikra való átrakása során,

(v) úgy készült, hogy könnyen megrakható és üríthető legyen, és

(vi) legalább egy m3 űrtartalmú,

a „leszerelhető felépítmény” a szállítótartályhoz sorolható;

k) az „indulási vámhivatal” kifejezés valamely Szerződő Fél bármelyik olyan vámhivatalát jelenti, ahol a rakománynak vagy annak egy részének TIR-fuvarozása megkezdődik;

l) a „rendeltetési vámhivatal” kifejezés valamely Szerződő Fél bármelyik olyan vámhivatalát jelenti, ahol a rakománynak vagy annak egy részének TIR-fuvarozása befejeződik;

m) az „átmenő vámhivatal” kifejezés valamely Szerződő Fél bármelyik olyan vámhivatalát jelenti, amelyen keresztül közúti jármű, járműszerelvény vagy szállítótartály belép a Szerződő Fél területére, vagy kilép onnan egy TIR-fuvarozás során;

n) „személyek”-en egyidejűleg a természetes és a jogi személyek értendők;

o) a TIR-igazolvány „birtokosa” kifejezés azt a személyt jelenti, aki számára a TIR-igazolványt az Egyezmény vonatkozó rendelkezései szerint kiállították, és akinek a nevében a TIR-igazolvánnyal vámáru-nyilatkozatot adtak, amellyel az indulási vámhivatalnál indítványozták, hogy az árukat TIR-művelet alá vonják. Ő felel a közúti jármű, járműszerelvény vagy szállítótartály, valamint a rakomány és a rá vonatkozó TIR-igazolvány bemutatásáért az indulási vámhivatalnál, az átmenő vámhivataloknál és a rendeltetési vámhivatalnál, valamint az Egyezmény egyéb vonatkozó rendelkezéseinek megfelelő betartásáért;

p) „súlyos vagy terjedelmes áru”-n értendő olyan tárgy, amelyet súlyánál, terjedelménél vagy jellegénél fogva általában nem fuvaroznak sem zárt közúti járműben, sem zárt szállítótartályban;

q) „garanciavállaló egyesület”-en az egyik Szerződő Fél vámhatóságai által meghatalmazott olyan egyesületet kell érteni, amely kezességet vállal a TIR-eljárást alkalmazó személyekért.

b) Alkalmazási terület

2. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény azoknak a küldeményeknek közbeeső átrakása nélküli, egy vagy több országhatáron áthaladó árufuvarozására vonatkozik, amelyeket az egyik Szerződő Fél indulási vámhivatalától a másik Szerződő Fél vagy ugyanazon Szerződő Fél rendeltetési vámhivataláig közúti járművel, járműszerelvénnyel vagy szállítótartállyal bonyolítanak le, feltéve, hogy a TIR-fuvarozás kezdete és befejezése között a fuvarozás egy szakasza közúton történik.

3. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek alkalmazhatósága érdekében:

a) a fuvarozást

(i) olyan közúti járművekkel, járműszerelvényekkel vagy szállítótartályokkal kell lebonyolítani, amelyeknek használatát előzőleg jóváhagyták a III. a) fejezetben meghatározott feltételek szerint, vagy

(ii) olyan közúti járművekkel, járműszerelvényekkel vagy szállítótartályokkal kell lebonyolítani, amelyek megfelelnek a III. c) fejezetben meghatározott feltételeknek, vagy

(iii) olyan közúti járművekkel vagy különleges járművekkel, például buszokkal, darukkal, utcaseprő gépekkel, betonterítő gépekkel és egyéb, exportált és az indulási vámhivataltól a rendeltetési vámhivatalhoz önjáró módon közlekedni képes eszközökkel kell lebonyolítani, amelyek megfelelnek a III. c) fejezetben meghatározott feltételeknek. Ha ezek a járművek egyéb árukat szállítanak, a fenti (i) vagy (ii) pontban hivatkozott feltételek alkalmazandók;

b) a fuvarozásokat a 6. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően felhatalmazott egyesületek garanciája mellett és a jelen Egyezmény 1. mellékletében közzétett mintával megegyező TIR-igazolvánnyal kell lebonyolítani.

c) Alapelvek

4. Cikk

A TIR-eljárás szerint fuvarozott áruk az átmenő vámhivataloknál mentesülnek a behozatali vagy kiviteli vámok és illetékek megfizetésének vagy letétbe helyezésének kötelezettsége alól.

5. Cikk

1. A TIR-eljárás szerint, zárral ellátott közúti járművekben, járműszerelvényekben vagy szállítótartályokban fuvarozott árukat, általános szabályként, az átmenő vámhivatalok nem vonják vámvizsgálat alá.

2. Mindazonáltal, a visszaélések megelőzése céljából, a vámhatóságok kivételesen, különösen szabálytalanság gyanúja esetén, az árukat ezeknél a vámhivataloknál megvizsgálhatják.

II. Fejezet

A TIR-IGAZOLVÁNY KIADÁSA

A garanciavállaló egyesületek felelőssége

6. Cikk

1. Mindegyik Szerződő Fél felhatalmazhat egyesületeket TIR-igazolványok kibocsátására akár közvetlenül, akár partner egyesületeken keresztül, illetve arra, hogy garanciavállalóként járjanak el, mindaddig, amíg a 9. melléklet I. részében foglalt minimum feltételek és követelmények teljesülnek.

Az engedélyt vissza kell vonni, ha a 9. melléklet I. részében foglalt minimum feltételek és követelmények már nem teljesülnek.

2. Valamely egyesület csak abban az esetben kaphat felhatalmazást egy országban, ha felelőssége kiterjed a vele egyazon nemzetközi szervezethez tartozó külföldi egyesületek által kiadott TIR-igazolványokkal az illető országban lebonyolított fuvarozásokra is.

2. bis. Az Intéző Bizottság felhatalmazza a 2. bekezdésben hivatkozott nemzetközi szervezetet, hogy vállalja a nemzetközi garanciarendszer hatékony megszervezésének és működtetésének feladatát, amennyiben az kész vállalni ezt a felelősséget.

3. Az egyesület olyan személyek részére bocsáthat ki TIR-igazolványokat, akiknek a TIR-eljáráshoz való jogosultságát az érintett személy állandó lakóhelye vagy székhelye szerinti Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága nem tagadta meg.

4. A TIR-eljárásban való részvételre csak olyan személyeket lehet felhatalmazni, akik teljesítik a jelen Egyezmény 9. mellékletének II. részében meghatározott minimum feltételeket és követelményeket. A 38. Cikk alkalmazásának sérelme nélkül az engedélyt vissza kell vonni, ha e feltételek teljesítése már nem biztosított.

5. A TIR-eljárásban való részvételre történő felhatalmazás a jelen Egyezmény 9. mellékletének II. részében foglalt eljárás szerint történik.

7. Cikk

A TIR-igazolványok nyomtatványai, amelyeket az illetékes külföldi egyesületek vagy a nemzetközi szervezetek küldenek a garanciavállaló egyesületeknek, mentesek a behozatali vagy kiviteli vámok és illetékek alól, és nem esnek sem behozatali, sem kiviteli tilalom vagy korlátozás alá.

8. Cikk

1. A garanciavállaló egyesület kötelezettséget vállal, hogy megfizeti azokat a követelhető, esetlegesen késedelmi kamatokkal növelt behozatali vagy kiviteli vámokat és illetékeket, amelyeket azon ország törvényei és vámelőírásai szerint, ahol a TIR-eljárással kapcsolatos szabálytalanságot megállapították, ki kellett volna fizetni. Az egyesület a fent említett összegekért az azok kifizetésére kötelezett személyekkel együttesen és egyetemlegesen felelős.

2. Ha az egyik Szerződő Fél törvényei és rendeletei nem írják elő behozatali vagy kiviteli vámok és illetékek megfizetését a fenti 1. bekezdésben foglaltak szerint, a garanciavállaló egyesület azonos feltételek mellett köteles a behozatali vagy kiviteli vámoknak és illetékeknek megfelelő összeget az esetleges késedelmi kamatokkal együtt megfizetni.

3. Minden Szerződő Fél meghatározza azt a TIR-igazolványonkénti legnagyobb pénzösszeget, amely az 1. és 2. bekezdésekben foglalt rendelkezések figyelembevételével a garanciavállaló egyesülettől követelhető.

4. A garanciavállaló egyesület attól az időponttól tartozik felelősséggel azon ország hatóságainak, ahol az indulási vámhivatal található, amikor a TIR-igazolványt a vámhivatal elfogadta. A következő országokban, amelyeken a TIR-eljárás szerint fuvarozott árukat átszállítják, ez a felelősség akkor kezdődik, amikor az áruk beléptetésre kerülnek ezen országokba, vagy abban az esetben, ha a TIR-fuvarozás a 26. Cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésének értelmében szünetel, akkor, amikor az a vámhivatal, ahol a TIR-fuvarozást újból megkezdik, a TIR-igazolványt elfogadja.

5. A garanciavállaló egyesület felelőssége nem csupán a TIR-igazolványban felsorolt árukra terjed ki, hanem azokra az árukra is, amelyek ugyan nincsenek felsorolva ebben az igazolványban, de a közúti jármű zárral ellátott részében vagy a zárral ellátott szállítótartályban találhatók; a felelősség semmiféle egyéb árura nem terjed ki.

6. A jelen cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésében említett vámok és illetékek megállapítása céljából a TIR-igazolványban szereplő árukra vonatkozó adatokat kell - az ellenkező bizonyítékok hiányában - helyesnek elfogadni.

7. Ha a jelen cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésében említett összegek esedékessé válnak, az illetékes hatóságoknak azok megfizetését - a lehetőségekhez mérten - a közvetlenül felelős személytől (vagy személyektől) kell követelniük, mielőtt a garanciavállaló egyesülethez fordulnának követelésükkel.

9. Cikk

1. A garanciavállaló egyesület meghatározza a TIR-igazolvány érvényességi idejét, megállapítva az érvényesség utolsó napját, amelynél később az igazolványt elfogadásra az indulási vámhivatalhoz nem lehet benyújtani.

2. Ha az igazolványt az indulási vámhivatal az érvényesség utolsó napján vagy ezen időpontot megelőzően elfogadta, mint ahogy a fenti 1. bekezdés előirányozza, az igazolvány a TIR-eljárásnak a rendeltetési vámhivatalnál történő befejezéséig érvényben marad.

10. Cikk

1. A TIR-eljárást késedelem nélkül mentesíteni kell.

2. Ha valamely ország vámhatóságai mentesítették a TIR-eljárást, nem követelhetik a garanciavállaló egyesülettől a 8. Cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésében említett összegek megfizetését, kivéve, ha a TIR-eljárás befejezésére vonatkozó igazolást szabálytalanul vagy csalárd módon szerezték meg vagy az eljárás befejezése nem történt meg.

11. Cikk

1. Amennyiben nem került sor egy TIR-eljárás mentesítésére, az illetékes hatóságok nem követelhetik a garanciavállaló egyesülettől a 8. Cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésében említett összegek megfizetését, ha attól az időponttól számított egy éven belül, amikor e hatóságok a TIR-igazolványt elfogadták, nem értesítették írásban az egyesületet a mentesítés elmaradásáról. Ugyancsak ez a rendelkezés alkalmazandó, ha a TIR-eljárás befejezésének igazolását szabálytalanul vagy csalárd módon szerezték meg, de ekkor a határidő két év.

2. A 8. Cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésében hivatkozott összegek megfizetésére irányuló követelést legkorábban attól az időponttól számított három hónap elteltével kell a garanciavállaló egyesülethez benyújtani, amikor az egyesületet értesítették arról, hogy a TIR-eljárást nem mentesítették, vagy a TIR-eljárás befejezésének igazolását szabálytalanul vagy csalárd módon szerezték meg, illetve legkésőbb az ettől az időponttól számított két éven belül. Azokban az esetekben, amikor a fent említett kétéves határidőn belül bírósági eljárásra kerül sor, a fizetési felszólításnak a bírói ítélet jogerőre emelkedését és végrehajthatóvá válását követő egy éven belül kell megtörténnie.

3. A követelt összegek kiegyenlítésére a garanciavállaló egyesület a hozzá intézett fizetési felszólítás keltétől számított három hónapos határidővel rendelkezik. A kifizetett összegeket az egyesület részére visszatérítik, ha a fizetési felszólítás keltétől számított két éven belül a vámhatóságok részére kielégítő módon igazolást nyert, hogy a szóban forgó fuvarozással kapcsolatosan semmiféle szabálytalanság nem történt.

III. Fejezet

TIR-IGAZOLVÁNNYAL TÖRTÉNŐ ÁRUFUVAROZÁS

a) A gépjárművek és szállítótartályok használatának engedélyezése

12. Cikk

A jelen fejezet a) és b) része rendelkezéseinek alkalmazhatósága érdekében valamennyi közúti járműnek kialakítását és felszerelését tekintve meg kell felelnie a jelen Egyezmény 2. mellékletében meghatározott feltételeknek, és a jelen Egyezmény 3. mellékletében meghatározott engedélyezési eljáráson kell átesnie. Az engedélynek meg kell egyeznie a 4. mellékletben közölt mintával.

13. Cikk

1. A jelen fejezet a) és b) része rendelkezéseinek alkalmazhatósága érdekében a szállítótartályokat a 7. melléklet első részében meghatározott feltételek szerint kell kialakítani, és használatukat ezen melléklet második részében meghatározott eljárás szerint kell engedélyezni.

2. Az 1956. évi, a szállítótartályokra vonatkozó vámegyezmény, az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének égisze alatt ebből következően létrejött megállapodások, az 1972. évi, szállítótartályokra vonatkozó vámegyezmény vagy minden, az utóbbi Egyezményt helyesbítő vagy módosító nemzetközi okmány rendelkezéseivel összhangban áruknak vámzár alatt történő nemzetközi fuvarozására engedélyezett szállítótartályokat úgy kell tekinteni, mint amelyek megfelelnek a fenti 1. bekezdés rendelkezéseinek, és azokat új engedélyezési eljárás nélkül a TIR-eljárás szerinti fuvarozásra el kell fogadni.

14. Cikk

1. Minden Szerződő Fél fenntartja magának a jogot, hogy visszautasítsa az olyan közúti járművek vagy szállítótartályok jóváhagyási bizonyítványa érvényességének elismerését, amelyek nem felelnek meg a fenti 12. és 13. Cikkekben előírt feltételeknek. A Szerződő Felek azonban nem késleltetik a fuvarozás lebonyolítását, ha a megállapított hiányosságok kismértékűek, és nem jelentenek semmiféle kockázatot a csempészet szempontjából.

2. Vámzár alatti áruszállításra történő ismételt felhasználása előtt az olyan közúti járművet vagy szállítótartályt, amely már nem felel meg a jóváhagyási bizonyítványa feltételeinek vagy eredeti állapotának, megfelelően kell helyreállítani vagy új engedélyezési eljárás alá kell vonni.

b) A TIR-igazolvánnyal lebonyolított fuvarozási eljárás

15. Cikk

1. A TIR-eljárás szerinti árufuvarozásra használt közúti járművek, járműszerelvények és szállítótartályok ideiglenes behozatalához semmiféle külön vámokmány nem követelhető. A közúti járműre, járműszerelvényekre vagy szállítótartályra semmiféle garancia nem követelhető.

2. Az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései nem akadályozhatják meg, hogy egy Szerződő Fél a nemzeti előírásai szerinti formaságok teljesítését megkövetelje a rendeltetési vámhivatalnál abból a célból, hogy a TIR-eljárás befejeztével biztosítsa a közúti jármű, járműszerelvény vagy a szállítótartály újra kivitelét.

16. Cikk

Ha közúti jármű vagy járműszerelvény TIR-fuvarozásban vesz részt, a jelen Egyezmény 5. mellékletében leírtaknak megfelelő négyszögletes „TIR” feliratú táblát helyeznek el a közúti jármű vagy járműszerelvény elejére, és egy másik azonos táblát a közúti jármű vagy járműszerelvény hátuljára. Ezeket a táblákat úgy kell elhelyezni, hogy jól láthatóak legyenek. A tábláknak oly módon kell eltávolíthatónak, rögzítettnek vagy kialakítottnak lenniük, hogy azokat meg lehessen fordítani, el lehessen takarni, hajlítani vagy bármilyen más módon feltüntetni, hogy a fuvarozás nem TIR-eljárásban történik.

17. Cikk

1. Közúti járművenként vagy szállítótartályonként egyetlen TIR-igazolványt állítanak ki. Ugyancsak egyetlen TIR-igazolványt állíthatnak ki egy járműszerelvényre, illetve az egy közúti járművön vagy járműszerelvényen elhelyezett több szállítótartályra. Ebben az esetben a TIR-igazolvány árunyilatkozatában külön kell feltüntetni a járműszerelvényt alkotó egyes járművek, illetve az egyes szállítótartályok tartalmát.

2. A TIR-igazolvány egyetlen útra érvényes. Legalább annyi leválasztható betétlapot kell tartalmaznia, amennyi a szóban forgó TIR-fuvarozáshoz szükséges.

18. Cikk

Egy TIR-fuvarozás több indulási és rendeltetési vámhivatalt érinthet, de az indulási és rendeltetési vámhivatalok száma nem haladhatja meg a négyet. A TIR-igazolványt a rendeltetési vámhivataloknak csak akkor lehet bemutatni, ha azt valamennyi indulási vámhivatal elfogadta.

19. Cikk

Az árukat és a közúti járművet, a járműszerelvényt vagy a szállítótartályt a TIR-igazolvánnyal együtt kell bemutatni az indulási vámhivatalnak. Az indulási ország vámhatóságai megteszik a megítélésük szerint szükséges intézkedéseket az árujegyzék pontosságának biztosítására, a vámzárak elhelyezésére, illetve az említett vámhatóságok felelősségére a kellő meghatalmazással bíró személyek által elhelyezett vámzárak ellenőrzésére.

20. Cikk

Saját országuk területén a vámhatóságok meghatározhatják az áthaladási határidőt, és megkövetelhetik, hogy a közúti jármű, járműszerelvény, illetve szállítótartály az előírt útvonalon haladjon.

21. Cikk

A közúti járművet, járműszerelvényt, illetve szállítótartályt rakományával és az arra vonatkozó TIR-igazolvánnyal együtt valamennyi átmenő vámhivatalnál, valamint a rendeltetési vámhivataloknál ellenőrzés céljából a vámhatóságoknak be kell mutatni.

22. Cikk

1. Általános szabályként és kivéve azt az esetet, amikor az 5. Cikk 2. bekezdése alkalmazásával az árukat megvizsgálják, minden egyes Szerződő Fél átmenő vámhivatalai elfogadják a többi Szerződő Fél vámzárait, feltéve, ha azok sértetlenek. Az említett vámhatóságok azonban jogosultak - ha az ellenőrzés azt szükségessé teszi - saját záraikat is elhelyezni.

2. Az egyik Szerződő Fél által így elfogadott vámzárak saját területén ugyanolyan jogi védelmet élveznek, mint a hazai vámzárak.

23. Cikk

A vámhatóságok

- a közúti járművet, járműszerelvényt, illetve szállítótartályt országuk területén a fuvarozók költségére nem kísértetik,

- a közúti járművek, járműszerelvények, illetve szállítótartályok rakományát útközben nem ellenőrzik és nem vizsgálják,

csak kivételes esetekben.

24. Cikk

Ha útközben vagy valamely átmenő vámhivatalnál a közúti jármű, járműszerelvény, illetve szállítótartály rakományát a vámhatóságok megvizsgálják, az elhelyezett új vámzárakat, valamint a végrehajtott ellenőrzések jellegét feltüntetik a TIR-igazolványnak az országukban felhasznált betétlapjain, a vonatkozó ellenőrző szelvényén, valamint a TIR-igazolványban maradó betétlapokon.

25. Cikk

Ha a vámzár menet közben - a 24. és 35. Cikkben felsoroltaktól eltérő esetekben - megsérül, illetve, ha az árurakomány megsemmisül vagy károsodik anélkül, hogy a vámzár megsérülne, a jelen Egyezmény 1. mellékletében a TIR-igazolvány használatára előírt eljárást kell követni, a hazai jogi szabályozás rendelkezései esetleges alkalmazásának hátráltatása nélkül a TIR-igazolványban található ténymegállapító jegyzőkönyvet kell felvenni.

26. Cikk

1. Ha a TIR-igazolvánnyal lebonyolított fuvarozás az út egy szakaszán olyan állam területén halad keresztül, amely nem Szerződő Fele a jelen Egyezménynek, a TIR-fuvarozás ezen az útszakaszon szünetel. Ebben az esetben annak a Szerződő Félnek a vámhatóságai, amelynek területén a fuvarozás folytatódik, elfogadják a TIR-igazolványt a TIR-fuvarozás újrafelvétele céljából, feltéve, ha a vámzárak és/vagy az azonosítási jelek sértetlenek maradtak.

2. Ugyanez lesz az eljárás az útvonalnak azon a szakaszán, amelyen a TIR-igazolványt birtokosa valamely Szerződő Fél területén azért nem használja, mert a vámtranzitra egyszerűbb eljárások érvényesek vagy vámtranzit eljárásra nincs szükség.

3. Ezekben az esetekben azokat a vámhivatalokat, ahol a TIR-fuvarozás megszakad vagy újrakezdődik, kiléptető, illetve beléptető közúti vámhivataloknak kell tekinteni.

27. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény, különösen pedig a 18. Cikk rendelkezéseinek fenntartásával az eredetileg megjelölt rendeltetési vámhivatal másik rendeltetési vámhivatallal helyettesíthető.

28. Cikk

1. A TIR-eljárás befejezését a vámhatóságnak késedelem nélkül igazolnia kell. A TIR-eljárás befejezése fenntartással vagy fenntartás nélkül igazolható; ha a befejezést fenntartással igazolták, a fenntartásnak magával a TIR-eljárással összefüggő cselekményekhez kell kapcsolódnia. E tényeket egyértelműen fel kell tüntetni a TIR-igazolványban.

2. Ha az árut más vámkezelés vagy másik vámeljárás hatálya alá helyezik, az ilyen vámkezelés vagy vámeljárás keretében esetleg elkövetett szabálytalanságok nem tulajdoníthatók a TIR-igazolvány birtokosának, mint olyannak vagy bárki más, a nevében eljáró személynek.

c) Súlyos vagy terjedelmes áruk fuvarozására vonatkozó rendelkezések

29. Cikk

1. Jelen rész rendelkezései csak a jelen Egyezmény 1. Cikkének p) bekezdésében meghatározott súlyos vagy terjedelmes áruk fuvarozására vonatkoznak.

2. Ha a jelen rész rendelkezései alkalmazandók, akkor a súlyos, illetve terjedelmes áruk fuvarozása - az indulási vámhivatal döntésétől függően - vámzárral el nem látott járművekkel vagy szállítótartállyal is elvégezhető.

3. A jelen rész rendelkezései csak akkor alkalmazandók, ha az indulási vámhivatal véleménye szerint a szállított súlyos vagy terjedelmes áruk, valamint az esetlegesen együtt szállított tartozékok leírás alapján nehézség nélkül azonosíthatók, vagy ha az áru vámzárakkal és/vagy azonosítási jelekkel úgy biztosítható, hogy szembetűnő nyomok hátrahagyása nélküli kicserélését vagy ellopását meggátolja.

30. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény valamennyi olyan rendelkezése, amelyet a jelen rész különleges rendelkezései nem érintenek, alkalmazandó a súlyos és terjedelmes áruknak a TIR-eljárás szerinti fuvarozására.

31. Cikk

A garanciavállaló egyesület felelőssége nemcsak a TIR-igazolványban felsorolt árukra terjed ki, hanem azokra az árukra is, amelyek nincsenek ugyan felsorolva ebben az igazolványban, de a rakfelületen vagy a TIR-igazolványban felsorolt áruk között találhatók.

32. Cikk

A TIR-igazolvány borítólapját és valamennyi betétlapját nyomtatott betűkkel, angol vagy francia nyelven feltüntetett „súlyos vagy terjedelmes áruk” megjelöléssel kell érvényesíteni.

33. Cikk

Az indulási vámhivatal megkövetelheti, hogy a TIR-igazolványhoz mellékeljék a szállított áru azonosításához szükséges rakjegyzéket, fényképeket, tervrajzokat stb. Ebben az esetben a vámhatóságok láttamozzák ezeket az okmányokat, azok egy példányát csatolják a TIR-igazolvány borítólapjának belső oldalához, amelyekre az igazolvány valamennyi árunyilatkozatában hivatkozni kell.

34. Cikk

Minden egyes Szerződő Fél átmenő vámhivatalai elfogadják a többi Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságai által elhelyezett vámzárakat és/vagy azonosítási jeleket. Ugyanakkor kiegészíthetik azokat más zárakkal és/vagy azonosítási jelekkel, a TIR-igazolványnak országukban használt betétlapjain, a megfelelő ellenőrző szelvényeken és a TIR-igazolványban maradó betétlapokon feljegyezve az új zárak és/vagy az azonosítási jelek adatait.

35. Cikk

Ha útközben vagy valamely átmenő vámhivatalnál a küldeményt megvizsgáló vámhatóságok kénytelenek eltávolítani a vámzárakat és/vagy az azonosítási jeleket, az alkalmazott új vámzárakat és/vagy azonosítási jeleket feljegyzik a TIR-igazolványnak országukban felhasznált betétlapjain, a megfelelő ellenőrző szelvényeken és a TIR-igazolványban maradó betétlapokon.

IV. Fejezet

A SZABÁLYOK MEGSÉRTÉSE

36. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény bármely rendelkezésének megsértéséért az elkövető annak az országnak a jogszabályai szerint felelős, amely országban a szabályt megsértették.

37. Cikk

Amennyiben a szabály megsértésének helye nem állapítható meg, akkor úgy tekintendő, hogy azt annak a Szerződő Félnek a területén követték el, ahol megállapították.

38. Cikk

1. Minden Szerződő Fél jogosult ideiglenesen vagy véglegesen a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek kedvezményéből kizárni minden olyan személyt, aki a nemzetközi közúti árufuvarozásra vonatkozó jogszabályok, illetve vámjogszabályok súlyos megsértésében vétkes.

2. A kizárásról egy héten belül értesíteni kell annak a Szerződő Félnek az illetékes hatóságait, amelynek a területén az érintett személy állandó lakóhellyel vagy székhellyel rendelkezik, annak az országnak vagy vámterületnek az egyesületét (egyesületeit), ahol a szabályokat megsértették, továbbá a TIR Végrehajtó Testületet.

39. Cikk

Ha a TIR-eljárás egyébként szabályszerűen folyt le:

1. a Szerződő Felek a határidőre és az útvonalra vonatkozó előírásoktól való kisebb eltéréseket nem teszik kifogás tárgyává.

2. Hasonlóképpen a TIR-igazolvány árunyilatkozatában szereplő adatok, valamint a közúti jármű, járműszerelvény, illetve szállítótartály tartalma közötti eltéréseket a jelen Egyezmény értelmében nem tekintik a jelen Egyezmény megsértésének a TIR-igazolvány birtokosa részéről, ha az illetékes hatóságoknak kielégítő módon bebizonyítják, hogy ezek az eltérések nem szándékosan elkövetett hibák, illetve a berakodásnál, feladásnál vagy az említett árunyilatkozat elkészítésénél tanúsított hanyagság következményeképpen állottak elő.

40. Cikk

Az indulási vagy rendeltetési országok vámszervei nem vonják felelősségre a TIR-igazolvány birtokosát azokért az eltérésekért, amelyeket ezekben az országokban állapítanak meg, ha ezek az eltérések valójában a TIR-fuvarozást megelőző vagy azt követő vámeljárásra vonatkoznak, amelyekre az igazolvány birtokosának nem lehetett befolyása.

41. Cikk

Ha a vámhatóságoknak kielégítő módon bizonyítják, hogy a TIR-igazolvány árunyilatkozatában szereplő áruk baleset vagy erőhatalom következtében semmisültek meg, vagy végérvényesen elvesztek, vagy természetükből eredő okokból mennyiségükből veszítettek, az egyébként járó vámok és illetékek megfizetésétől eltekintenek.

42. Cikk

Bármely Szerződő Fél indokolt kérésére a Szerződő Feleknek a TIR-fuvarozásban érdekelt illetékes szervei megadnak minden olyan rendelkezésükre álló tájékoztatót, amelyek szükségesek a fenti 39., 40. és 41. Cikkek rendelkezéseinek alkalmazásához.

42. bis Cikk

Az illetékes hatóságok az egyesületekkel szoros együttműködésben kötelesek megtenni minden szükséges intézkedést a TIR-igazolványok megfelelő használatának biztosításához. Ennek érdekében megfelelő nemzeti vagy nemzetközi ellenőrző intézkedéseket hozhatnak. Az illetékes hatóságok által hozott nemzeti ellenőrző intézkedésekről haladéktalanul értesíteni kell a TIR Végrehajtó Testületet, amely megvizsgálja, hogy az adott intézkedések összhangban állnak-e az Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel. A nemzetközi ellenőrzési intézkedéseket az Intéző Bizottság fogadja el.

V. Fejezet

ÉRTELMEZŐ RENDELKEZÉSEK

43. Cikk

A 6. és a 7. mellékletben (harmadik rész) szereplő értelmező rendelkezések megadják a jelen Egyezmény és mellékletei egyes rendelkezéseinek magyarázatát, valamint néhány gyakorlati tanácsot adnak.

VI. Fejezet

VEGYES RENDELKEZÉSEK

44. Cikk

Minden Szerződő Fél engedélyezi az érdekelt garanciavállaló egyesületeknek:

a) a jelen Egyezmény 8. Cikkében foglalt rendelkezések értelmében a Szerződő Felek hatóságai által követelt összegek kiegyenlítéséhez szükséges devizák átutalását; és

b) a külföldi partner egyesületek vagy nemzetközi szervezetek által a garanciavállaló egyesületeknek megküldött TIR-igazolvány nyomtatványok árának kifizetéséhez szükséges devizák átutalását.

45. Cikk

Minden Szerződő Fél közzéteszi azon indulási, átmenő- és rendeltetési vámhivatalok jegyzékét, amelyeket a TIR-eljárások lefolytatására kijelölt. A területileg szomszédos Szerződő Felek egymással tanácskozva, közös megegyezéssel jelölik ki az illetékes határhivatalokat és azok nyitvatartási idejét.

46. Cikk

1. A jelen Egyezményben említett vámeljárásokat végző vámhivatali személyzet közreműködéséért külön díjat nem szednek, azokat az eseteket kivéve, amikor ezt a tevékenységet az ilyen eljárásokra természetszerűen előirányzott napokon, órákon vagy helyeken kívül végzik.

2. Amilyen mértékben csak lehetséges, a Szerződő Felek megkönnyítik a vámhivataloknál a gyorsan romló árukkal kapcsolatos vámeljárásokat.

47. Cikk

1. A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezései nem képezik akadályát az erkölcsvédelmi, közbiztonsági, egészségügyi és közegészségügyi, állat-egészségügyi vagy növényvédelmi megfontolásokon alapuló, nemzeti rendelkezésekből eredő korlátozások és ellenőrzések alkalmazásának, sem pedig az e rendelkezések alapján kivethető összegek beszedésének.

2. A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezései nem képezik akadályát a fuvarozásokat szabályozó egyéb nemzeti és nemzetközi rendelkezések alkalmazásának.

48. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezései nem zárják ki a vám- vagy gazdasági uniót alkotó Szerződő Feleknek azt a jogát, hogy különleges előírásokat fogadjanak el területeikről kiinduló, azokra érkező vagy azokon áthaladó fuvarozási műveletekre, amennyiben ezek az előírások a jelen Egyezmény nyújtotta könnyítéseket nem korlátozzák.

49. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény nem képezi akadályát olyan nagyobb mértékű kedvezmények alkalmazásának, amelyeket a Szerződő Felek engedélyeznek vagy engedélyezni kívánnának akár egyoldalú rendelkezések, akár két- vagy többoldalú egyezmények alapján, feltéve, hogy az így engedélyezett kedvezmények a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek alkalmazását, különösen pedig a TIR-eljárás végrehajtását nem akadályozzák.

50. Cikk

A Szerződő Felek kérésre közlik egymással a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek végrehajtásához szükséges információkat, elsősorban a közúti járművek, illetve a szállítótartályok használata engedélyezésére, valamint a szerkezetük műszaki jellemzőire vonatkozókat.

51. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény mellékletei az Egyezmény elválaszthatatlan részét képezik.

VII. Fejezet

ZÁRÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

52. Cikk

Aláírás, megerősítés, elfogadás, jóváhagyás és csatlakozás

1. Az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének vagy szakosított intézményeinek, illetve a Nemzetközi Atomenergia Ügynökségnek valamennyi tagállama, a Nemzetközi Bíróság alapszabály szerinti Felei és minden, az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének Közgyűlése által meghívott más állam a jelen Egyezménynek szerződő felévé válhat

a) azt megerősítés, elfogadás vagy jóváhagyás fenntartása nélkül aláírva;

b) a megerősítési, elfogadási vagy jóváhagyási okirat letétbe helyezésével, miután azt a megerősítés, elfogadás vagy jóváhagyás fenntartásával aláírta; vagy

c) csatlakozási okirat letétbe helyezésével.

2. A jelen Egyezmény 1976. január 1-jétől 1976. december 31-ig bezárólag áll nyitva aláírásra az Egyesült Nemzetek Hivatalánál Genfben, a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében említett államok részére. Ezt követően csatlakozásukra nyílik lehetőség.

3. A jelen cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésével összhangban a vám- és gazdasági uniók a jelen Egyezménynek Szerződő Feleivé válhatnak valamennyi tagállamukkal egyidejűleg, vagy bármikor azt követően, hogy valamennyi tagállamuk a jelen Egyezmény Szerződő Felévé vált. Ezen unióknak azonban nincs szavazati joguk.

4. A megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási okiratokat az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezete főtitkáránál helyezik letétbe.

53. Cikk

Hatálybalépés

1. A jelen Egyezmény hat hónappal az az időpont után lép hatályba, amikor az 52. Cikk 1. bekezdésében említett államok közül öt azt a megerősítés, elfogadás vagy jóváhagyás fenntartása nélkül aláírta vagy a megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási, illetve csatlakozási okiratot letétbe helyezte.

2. Azt követően, hogy az 52. Cikk 1. bekezdésében említett államok közül öt azt a megerősítés, elfogadás vagy jóváhagyás fenntartása nélkül aláírta, vagy a megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási, illetve csatlakozási okiratát letétbe helyezte, a jelen Egyezmény minden új Szerződő Fél részére hat hónappal azon időpontot követően lép hatályba, amikor a megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási, illetve a csatlakozási okiratát letétbe helyezte.

3. Minden megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási, illetve csatlakozási okiratot, amelyet a jelen Egyezmény valamely módosításának hatálybalépése után helyeztek letétbe, a jelen Egyezmény módosított szövegére vonatkozóan elfogadottnak kell tekinteni.

4. Minden hasonló jellegű okiratot, amelyet valamely módosítás elfogadása után, de annak hatálybalépése előtt helyeztek letétbe, a módosítás hatálybalépésének napjától a jelen Egyezmény módosított szövegére vonatkozóan elfogadottnak kell tekinteni.

54. Cikk

Felmondás

1. A jelen Egyezményt bármely Szerződő Fél felmondhatja az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezete főtitkárához intézett bejelentéssel.

2. A felmondás attól a naptól számított tizenöt hónap elteltével lép hatályba, amikor a főtitkár az arra vonatkozó bejelentést megkapta.

3. Az indulási vámhivatal által a felmondás hatálybalépése előtt elfogadott TIR-igazolványok érvényességét a felmondás nem érinti, és a garanciavállaló egyesületek felelőssége a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezései szerint érvényben marad.

55. Cikk

Megszűnés

Ha a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépése után a Szerződő Felek száma tizenkét egymást követő hónap folyamán öt alá csökken, a jelen Egyezmény hatálya az említett tizenkét hónapos időszak végével megszűnik.

56. Cikk

Az 1959. évi TIR-Egyezmény hatályon kívül helyezése

1. Hatálybalépésével a jelen Egyezmény a Szerződő Felei közötti kapcsolatokban hatályon kívül helyezi és helyettesíti az 1959. évi TIR-Egyezményt.

2. A közúti járműveknek és szállítótartályoknak az 1959. évi TIR-Egyezmény feltételei szerint kiadott jóváhagyási bizonyítványait érvényességi határidejükön belül vagy annak meghosszabbítása alatt elfogadják a jelen Egyezmény Szerződő Felei által lebonyolított vámzár alatti árufuvarozásra, feltéve, hogy ezek a járművek és szállítótartályok továbbra is megfelelnek az engedélyezésük során eredetileg előírt feltételeknek.

57. Cikk

Véleményeltérések rendezése

1. A jelen Egyezmény értelmezését vagy alkalmazását illetően két vagy több Szerződő Fél között felmerült bármilyen véleményeltérést, amennyiben lehetséges, a vitázó Felek közötti tárgyalások útján vagy egyéb módon kell rendezni.

2. A jelen Egyezmény értelmezését vagy alkalmazását illetően két vagy több Szerződő Fél között felmerült véleményeltérést, amelyet a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében előirányzott módon nem lehetett rendezni, egyikük indítványára a következő összetételű döntőbíróság elé terjesztik: a vitázó Felek mindegyike egy döntőbírót jelöl ki, és ezek a bírák egy másik döntőbírót jelölnek ki elnökké. Ha az indítványt követő három hónapon belül valamelyik Fél nem nevez meg bírót vagy a bírák nem tudtak elnököt választani, a Felek bármelyike kérheti az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkárát, hogy jelölje ki a bírót, illetve a döntőbíróság elnökét.

3. A 2. bekezdés szerint létrehozott döntőbíróság határozata a vitázó felek számára kötelező érvényű.

4. A döntőbíróság meghatározza saját belső ügyrendjét.

5. A döntőbíróság határozatait szótöbbséggel hozza.

6. A vitázó felek között a döntőbíróság határozatának értelmezése és végrehajtása során felmerülő minden nézeteltérést az egyik Szerződő Fél elbírálásra az elé a döntőbíróság elé terjesztheti, amely a határozatot hozta.

58. Cikk

Fenntartások

1. Bármely állam a jelen Egyezmény aláírása, megerősítése vagy ahhoz való csatlakozása alkalmával kinyilváníthatja, hogy magára nézve nem tekinti kötelezőnek a jelen Egyezmény 57. Cikkének 2-6. bekezdését. A többi Szerződő Felet sem kötik e bekezdések az olyan Szerződő Felekkel szemben, amelyek ilyen fenntartással éltek.

2. Bármely Szerződő Fél, amely a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott fenntartással élt, e fenntartását az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkárához intézett bejelentéssel bármikor visszavonhatja.

3. A jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében szereplő fenntartásokon kívül a jelen Egyezménnyel kapcsolatban semmiféle egyéb fenntartásnak helye nincs.

58. bis Cikk

Intéző Bizottság

Valamennyi Szerződő Félből álló Intéző Bizottságot kell létrehozni. Ennek összetételét, feladatait és eljárási szabályait a 8. melléklet határozza meg.

58. ter Cikk

TIR Végrehajtó Testület

Az Intéző Bizottság kiegészítő testületként létrehozza a TIR Végrehajtó Testületet, amely a maga nevében az Egyezmény és az Intéző Bizottság által rábízott feladatokat látja el. Ennek összetételét, feladatait és eljárási szabályait a 8. melléklet határozza meg.

59. Cikk

A jelen Egyezmény módosítási eljárása

1. A jelen Egyezmény, a mellékleteit is beleértve, az e cikkben meghatározott eljárás szerint, bármely Szerződő Fél javaslatára módosítható.

2. A jelen Egyezmény módosítására tett bármely javaslatot az Intéző Bizottság köteles megvizsgálni a 8. mellékletben meghatározott szabályok szerint. Minden ilyen, az Intéző Bizottság ülésén megvizsgált vagy kidolgozott módosítást, amelyet a Bizottság jelen levő és szavazó tagjainak kétharmados szavazattöbbségével elfogadott, az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára elfogadásra a Szerződő Feleknek megküld.

3. A 60. Cikk rendelkezéseinek fenntartásával, valamennyi javasolt és az előző bekezdés rendelkezéseivel összhangban megküldött módosítás minden Szerződő Félre nézve a megküldéstől számított 12 hónapos időszakot követő 3 hónap elteltével hatályba lép, ha ezen időszak alatt valamely Állam, amely egyúttal Szerződő Fél is, az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkáránál nem emel kifogást a javasolt módosítással szemben.

4. Ha a javasolt módosítással kapcsolatosan a jelen cikk 3. bekezdése rendelkezésének megfelelően kifogást emeltek, a módosítást elutasítottnak kell tekinteni, és az semmilyen hatállyal nem bír.

60. Cikk

Különleges eljárás az 1., 2., 3., 4., 5., 6., 7., 8. és 9. mellékletek módosítására

1. Minden, az 1., 2., 3., 4., 5., 6., 7., 8. és 9. mellékletre vonatkozóan javasolt és az 59. Cikk 1., 2. bekezdése rendelkezéseinek megfelelően megvizsgált módosítás az Intéző Bizottság által a módosítás elfogadásakor meghatározott időpontban hatályba lép, kivéve, ha egy korábbi, az Intéző Bizottság által ugyanakkor meghatározott időpontig azon államok ötödrésze vagy 5 olyan állam, aki Szerződő Fél - ha ez a szám a kevesebb - értesíti az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkárát a módosítással szemben emelt kifogásairól. A jelen bekezdésben említett időpontokat az Intéző Bizottság a jelen levő és szavazó tagjai 2/3-os szavazattöbbségével határozza meg.

2. A fenti 1. bekezdésben előirányzott eljárásnak megfelelően elfogadott módosítás a hatálybalépésével minden Szerződő Fél tekintetében hatálytalanítja mindazokat a korábbi rendelkezéseket, amelyeket érint.

61. Cikk

Közlések, értesítések és kifogások

Minden olyan közlésről, értesítésről, illetve kifogásról, amelyet a fenti 59. és 60. Cikkek alapján tettek, valamint valamely módosítás hatálybalépésének időpontjáról az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára tájékoztatja valamennyi Szerződő Felet és a jelen Egyezmény 52. Cikkének 1. bekezdésében megjelölt valamennyi államot.

62. Cikk

Felülvizsgálati konferencia

1. Bármely, Szerződő Felet képező állam az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkárához intézett bejelentéssel a jelen Egyezmény felülvizsgálata céljából konferencia összehívását kérheti.

2. A felülvizsgálati konferenciát, amelyre valamennyi Szerződő Felet és az 52. Cikk 1. bekezdésében említett valamennyi államot meghívják, az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára hívja össze, ha attól az időponttól számított 6 hónapon belül, amikor az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára az értesítést közölte, a Szerződő Feleket képező államoknak legalább egynegyede a főtitkárnak a kéréssel kapcsolatos egyetértését jelezte.

3. Az Intéző Bizottság indítványára ugyancsak az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára hívja össze a felülvizsgálati konferenciát, amelyre meghívják valamennyi Szerződő Felet és az 52. Cikk 1. bekezdésében említett valamennyi államot. Ilyen indítvány szükségességéről az Intéző Bizottság jelen levő és szavazó tagjainak szavazattöbbségével dönt.

4. Ha a jelen cikk 1. vagy 3. bekezdésében foglalt rendelkezések alkalmazásával konferenciát hívnak össze, az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára erről értesíti valamennyi Szerződő Felet, felkérve őket, hogy 3 hónapon belül terjesszék elő a konferencián megvizsgáltatni kívánt javaslataikat. Az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára legalább 3 hónappal a konferencia megnyitása előtt valamennyi Szerződő Félnek megküldi a konferencia ideiglenes napirendjét és ezeknek a javaslatoknak a szövegét.

63. Cikk

Közlések

A 61. és 62. Cikkekben előirányzott értesítéseken és közléseken túlmenően az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkára értesíti az 52. Cikkben megjelölt valamennyi államot:

a) az 52. Cikk értelmében történt aláírásokról, megerősítésekről, elfogadásokról, jóváhagyásokról és csatlakozásokról;

b) az 53. Cikknek megfelelően a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépésének időpontjáról;

c) az 54. Cikk értelmében bejelentett felmondásokról;

d) az 55. Cikk értelmében a jelen Egyezmény megszűnéséről;

e) az 58. Cikk értelmében bejelentett fenntartásokról.

64. Cikk

Hiteles szöveg

A jelen Egyezmény eredeti példányát 1976. december 31. után letétbe helyezik az Egyesült Nemzetek Szervezetének főtitkáránál, aki annak hitelesített másolatait megküldi valamennyi Szerződő Félnek és az 52. Cikk 1. bekezdésében említett valamennyi államnak, amelyek nem Szerződő Felek.

Ennek hiteléül az erre kellően felhatalmazott alulírottak a jelen Egyezményt aláírták.

Készült Genfben, ezerkilencszázhetvenöt november tizennegyedikén egyetlen példányban, angol, francia és orosz nyelven, mindhárom szöveg egyaránt hiteles.”

3. § A Magyar Népköztársaság Elnöki Tanácsa a szerződés megerősítése alkalmából a következő fenntartást és nyilatkozatot tette:

„A Magyar Népköztársaság nem tekinti magára nézve kötelezőnek az Egyezmény 57. Cikkének a kötelező döntőbíráskodásra vonatkozó rendelkezéseit.”

„A Magyar Népköztársaság felhívja a figyelmet arra, hogy az Egyezmény 52. Cikke 1. bekezdésének rendelkezései ellentétben állnak a nemzetközi jog alapelveivel. Az államok szuverén egyenlőségének általánosan elfogadott elvéből következik, hogy az Egyezménynek nyitva kellene állnia minden állam részére, megkülönböztetés és korlátozás nélkül.”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény a kihirdetését követő 15. napon lép hatályba, egyidejűleg hatályát veszti

a) az áruknak TIR-igazolvánnyal történő nemzetközi fuvarozására vonatkozó vámegyezmény kihirdetéséről szóló 1978. évi 16. törvényerejű rendelet és a módosításáról rendelkező 2001. évi VII. törvény, továbbá

b) a közúti járművek időszakos vizsgálata egységes feltételeinek elfogadásáról és ezen vizsgálat kölcsönös elismeréséről szóló, Bécsben, 1997. november 13-án aláírt Egyezmény kihirdetéséről rendelkező 2001. évi LXVIII. törvény 4. §-ának (2) bekezdése.

(2) Felhatalmazást kap a gazdasági és közlekedési miniszter, valamint a pénzügyminiszter, hogy a törvény végrehajtásának szabályait rendeletben szabályozza.

(3) Felhatalmazást kap a gazdasági és közlekedési miniszter, hogy az Egyezmény mellékleteit rendeletben tegye közzé.