2003. évi XXV. törvény

a Magyar Köztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság között a kettős adóztatás elkerüléséről a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén Budapesten, 2001. június 20-án aláírt Egyezmény kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés a Magyar Köztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság között a kettős adóztatás elkerüléséről a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén, Budapesten, 2001. június 20-án aláírt Egyezményt e törvénnyel hirdeti ki.

(Az Egyezmény megerősítő okiratait Belgrádban a 2002. év december 13. napján cserélték ki.)

2. § Az Egyezmény angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„CONVENTION BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF HUNGARY AND THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME AND ON CAPITAL

THE REPUBLIC OF HUNGARY AND THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA

desiring to conclude a Convention for the avoidance of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and on capital, have agreed as follows:

Article 1

PERSONAL SCOPE

This Convention shall apply to persons who are residents of one or both of the Contracting States.

Article 2

TAXES COVERED

1. This Convention shall apply to taxes on income and on capital imposed on behalf of a Contracting State or of its political subdivisions or local authorities, irrespective of the manner in which they are levied.

2. There shall be regarded as taxes on income and on capital all taxes imposed on total income, on total capital, or on elements of income or of capital, including taxes on gains from the alienation of movable or immovable property, taxes on the total amounts of wages or salaries paid by enterprises, as well as taxes on capital appreciation.

3. The existing taxes to which the Convention shall apply are in particular:

in Yugoslavia:

(1) the tax on profit;

(2) the tax on income;

(3) the tax on capital;

(4) the tax on revenue from international transport

(hereinafter referred to as „Yugoslav tax”);

in Hungary:

(1) the personal income tax;

(2) the corporate tax;

(3) the dividend tax;

(4) the land parcel tax;

(5) the building tax

(hereinafter referred to as „Hungarian tax”).

4. The Convention shall apply also to any identical or substantially similar taxes which are imposed after the date of signature of the Convention in addition to, or in place of, the existing taxes. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall notify each other of any substantial changes which have been made in their respective taxation laws.

Article 3

GENERAL DEFINITIONS

1. For the purposes of this Convention:

(1) the term „Yugoslavia” means the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and when used in a geographical sense it means the land territory of Yugoslavia, its internal sea waters and the belt of the territorial sea, the air space thereover, as well as the seabed and subsoil of the part of the high sea outside the outer limit of the territorial sea over which Yugoslavia exercises its sovereign rights for the purpose of exploration and exploitation of their natural resources in accordance with its internal legislation and international law;

(2) the term „Hungary” means the Republic of Hungary and when used in a geographical sense means the territory of the Republic of Hungary;

(3) the terms „a Contracting State” and „the other Contracting State” mean Yugoslavia or Hungary, as the context requires;

(4) the term „national” means:

- any individual possessing the nationality of a Contracting State;

- any legal person, partnership, association or other entity deriving its status as such from the laws in force in a Contracting State;

(5) the term „person” includes an individual, a company and any other body of persons;

(6) the term „company” means any body corporate or any entity which is treated as a body corporate for tax purposes;

(7) the terms „enterprise of a Contracting State” and „enterprise of the ther Contracting State” mean respectively an enterprise carried on by a resident of a Contracting State and an enterprise carried on by a resident of the other Contracting State;

(8) the term „international traffic” means any transport by a ship, boat, aircraft or road-transport vehicle operated by an enterprise which has its place of effective management in a Contracting State, except when the ship, boat, aircraft or road-transport vehicle is operated solely between places in the other Contracting State;

(9) the term „competent authority” means:

- in the case of Yugoslavia, the Federal Ministry of Finance or its authorized representative;

- in the case of Hungary, the Minister of Finance or his authorized representative.

2. As regards the application of the Convention by a Contracting State, any term not defined therein shall have the meaning which it has under the law of that State concerning the taxes to which the Convention applies and meaning under the applicable tax laws of that State, will be prevailing over a meaning given to the term under other laws of that State.

Article 4

RESIDENT

1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term „resident of a Contracting State” means any person who, under the laws of that State, is liable to tax therein by reason of his domicile, residence, place of incorporation, place of management or any other criterion of a similar nature, and also includes that State and any political subdivision or local authority thereof. This term, however, does not include any person who is liable to tax in that State in respect only of income from sources in that State, or capital situated therein.

2. Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, then his status shall be determined as follows:

(1) he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State in which he has a permanent home available to him; if he has a permanent home available to him in both States, he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State with which his personal and economic relations are closer (centre of vital interests);

(2) if the State in which he has his centre of vital interests cannot be determined, or if he has not a permanent home available to him in either State, he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State in which he has an habitual abode;

(3) if he has an habitual abode in both States or in neither of them, he shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State of which he is a national;

(4) if he is a national of both States or of neither of them, the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall settle the question by mutual agreement.

3. Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 a person other than an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, then it shall be deemed to be a resident only of the State in which its place of effective management is situated.

Article 5

PERMANENT ESTABLISHMENT

1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term „permanent establishment” means a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.

2. The term „permanent establishment” includes especially:

(1) a place of management;

(2) a branch;

(3) an office;

(4) a factory;

(5) a workshop, and

(6) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of natural resources.

3. A building site or construction or installation project constitutes a permanent establishment only if it lasts more than twelve months.

4. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, the term „permanent establishment” shall be deemed not to include:

(1) the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise;

(2) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery;

(3) the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of processing by another enterprise;

(4) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of purchasing goods or merchandise or of collecting information, for the enterprise;

(5) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character;

(6) the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for any combination of activities mentioned in sub-paragraphs (1) to (5) provided that the overall activity of the fixed place of business resulting from this combination is of a preparatory or auxiliary character.

5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, where a person - other than an agent of an independent status to whom paragraph 6 applies - is acting on behalf of an enterprise and has, and habitually exercises, in a Contracting State an authority to conclude contracts in the name of the enterprise, that enterprise shall be deemed to have a permanent establishment in that State in respect of any activities which that person undertakes for the enterprise, unless the activities of such person are limited to those mentioned in paragraph 4 which, if exercised through a fixed place of business, would not make this fixed place of business a permanent establishment under the provisions of that paragraph.

6. An enterprise shall not be deemed to have a permanent establishment in a Contracting State merely because it carries on business in that State through a broker, general commission agent or any other agent of an independent status, provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course of their business.

7. The fact that a company which is a resident of a Contracting State controls or is controlled by a company which is a resident of the other Contracting State, or which carries on business in that other State (whether through a permanent establishment or otherwise) shall not of itself constitute either company a permanent establishment of the other.

Article 6

INCOME FROM IMMOVABLE PROPERTY

1. Income derived by a resident of a Contracting State from immovable property (including income from agriculture or forestry) situated in the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

2. The term „immovable property” shall have the meaning which it has under the law of the Contracting State in which the property in question is situated. The term shall in any case include property accessory to immovable property, livestock and equipment used in agriculture and forestry, rights to which the provisions of general law respecting landed property apply, usufruct of immovable property and rights to variable or fixed payments as consideration for the working of, or the right to work, mineral deposits, sources and other natural resources; ships, boats, aircraft and road-transport vehicles shall not be regarded as immovable property.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall apply to income derived from the direct use, letting, or use in any other form of immovable property.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 3 shall also apply to the income from immovable property of an enterprise and to income from immovable property used for the performance of independent personal services.

Article 7

BUSINESS PROFITS

1. The profits of an enterprise of a Contracting State shall be taxable only in that State unless the enterprise carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein. If the enterprise carries on business as aforesaid, the profits of the enterprise may be taxed in the other State but only so much of them as is attributable to that permanent establishment.

2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, where an enterprise of a Contracting State carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein, there shall in each Contracting State be attributed to that permanent establishment the profits which it might be expected to make if it were a distinct and separate enterprise engaged in the same or similar activities under the same or similar conditions and dealing wholly independently with the enterprise of which it is a permanent establishment.

3. In determining the profits of a permanent establishment, there shall be allowed as deductions expenses which are incurred for the purposes of the permanent establishment, including executive and general administrative expenses so incurred, whether in the State in which the permanent establishment is situated or elsewhere.

4. Insofar as it has been customary in a Contracting State to determine the profits to be attributed to a permanent establishment on the basis of an apportionment of the total profits of the enterprise to its various parts, nothing in paragraph 2 shall preclude that Contracting State from determining the profits to be taxed by such an apportionment as may be customary; the method of apportionment adopted shall, however, be such that the result shall be in accordance with the principles contained in this Article.

5. No profits shall be attributed to a permanent establishment by reason of the mere purchase by that permanent establishment of goods or merchandise for the enterprise.

6. For the purposes of the preceding paragraphs, the profits to be attributed to the permanent establishment shall be determined by the same method year by year unless there is good and sufficient reason to the contrary.

7. Where profits include items of income which are dealt with separately in other Articles of this Convention, then the provisions of those Articles shall not be affected by the provisions of this Article.

Article 8

INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC

1. Profits from the operation of ships, boats, aircraft or road-transport vehicles in international traffic shall be taxable only in the Contracting State in which the place of effective management of the enterprise is situated.

2. If the place of effective management of a shipping enterprise is aboard a ship or boat, then it shall be deemed to be situated in the Contracting State in which the home harbour of the ship or boat is situated, or, if there is no such home harbour, in the Contracting State of which the operator of the ship or boat is a resident.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall also apply to profits from the participation in a pool, a joint business or an international operating agency.

Article 9

ASSOCIATED ENTERPRISES

Where

(1) an enterprise of a Contracting State participates directly or indirectly in the management, control or capital of an enterprise of the other Contracting State, or

(2) the same persons participate directly or indirectly in the management, control or capital of an enterprise of a Contracting State and an enterprise of the other Contracting State,

and in either case conditions are made or imposed between the two enterprises in their commercial or financial relations which differ from those which would be made between independent enterprises, then any profits which would, but for those conditions, have accrued to one of the enterprises, but, by reason of those conditions, have not so accrued, may be included in the profits of that enterprise and taxed accordingly.

Article 10

DIVIDENDS

1. Dividends paid by a company which is a resident of a Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

2. However, such dividends may also be taxed in the Contracting State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident and according to the laws of that State, but if the beneficial owner of the dividends is a resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so charged shall not exceed:

(1) 5 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends if the beneficial owner is a company which holds directly at least 25 per cent of the capital of the company paying the dividends;

(2) 15 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends in all other cases.

The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall by mutual agreement settle the mode of application of these limitations, if necessary.

This paragraph shall not affect the taxation of the company in respect of the profits out of which the dividends are paid.

3. The term „dividends” as used in this Article means income from shares, or other rights, not being debt-claims, participating in profits, as well as income from other corporate rights which is subjected to the same taxation treatment as income from shares by the laws of the State of which the company making the distribution is a resident.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial owner of the dividends, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State of which the company paying the dividends is a resident, through a permanent establishment situated therein, or performs in that other State independent personal services from a fixed base situated therein, and the holding in respect of which the dividends are paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case the provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be, shall apply.

5. Where a company which is a resident of a Contracting State derives profits or income from the other Contracting State, that other State may not impose any tax on the dividends paid by the company, except insofar as such dividends are paid to a resident of that other State or insofar as the holding in respect of which the dividends are paid is effectively connected with a permanent establishment or a fixed base situated in that other State, nor subject the company’s undistributed profits to a tax on the company’s undistributed profits, even if the dividends paid or the undistributed profits consist wholly or partly of profits or income arising in such other State.

Article 11

INTEREST

1. Interest arising in a Contracting State and paid to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

2. However, such interest may also be taxed in the Contracting State in which it arises and according to the laws of that State, but if the beneficial owner of the interest is a resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so charged shall not exceed 10 per cent of the gross amount of the interest. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall by mutual agreement settle the mode of application of this limitation, if necessary.

3. The term „interest” as used in this Article means income from debt-claims of every kind, whether or not secured by mortgage and whether or not carrying a right to participate in the debtor’s profits, and in particular, income from government securities and income from bonds or debentures, including premiums and prizes attaching to such securities, bonds or debentures. Penalty charges for late payment shall not be regarded as interest for the purpose of this Article.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial owner of the interest, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State in which the interest arises, through a permanent establishment situated therein, or performs in that other State independent personal services from a fixed base situated therein, and the debt-claim in respect of which the interest is paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case the provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be, shall apply.

5. Interest shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting State when the payer is a resident of that State. Where, however, the person paying the interest, whether he is a resident of a Contracting State or not, has in a Contracting State a permanent establishment or a fixed base in connection with which the indebtedness on which the interest is paid was incurred, and such interest is borne by such permanent establishment or fixed base, then such interest shall be deemed to arise in the State in which the permanent establishment or fixed base is situated.

6. Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer and the beneficial owner or between both of them and some other person, the amount of the interest, having regard to the debt-claim for which it is paid, exceeds the amount which would have been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in the absence of such relationship, the provisions of this Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such case, the excess part of the payments shall remain taxable according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard being had to the other provisions of this Convention.

Article 12

ROYALTIES

1. Royalties arising in a Contracting State and paid to a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

2. However, such royalties may also be taxed in the Contracting State in which they arise and according to the laws of that State, but if the beneficial owner of the royalties is a resident of the other Contracting State, the tax so charged shall not exceed 10 per cent of the gross amount of the royalties. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall by mutual agreement settle the mode of application of this limitation, if necessary.

3. The term „royalties” as used in this Article means payments of any kind received as a consideration for the use of, or the right to use, any copyright of literary, artistic or scientific work including cinematograph films or films or tapes used for radio or television broadcasting, any patent, trade mark, design or model, plan, secret formula or process, or for the use of, or the right to use, industrial, commercial, or scientific equipment, or for information concerning industrial, commercial or scientific experience.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply if the beneficial owner of the royalties, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State in which the royalties arise, through a permanent establishment situated therein, or performs in that other State independent personal services from a fixed base situated therein, and the right or property in respect of which the royalties are paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case the provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be, shall apply.

5. Royalties shall be deemed to arise in a Contracting State when the payer is a resident of that State. Where, however, the person paying the royalties, whether he is a resident of a Contracting State or not, has in a Contracting State a permanent establishment or a fixed base in connection with which the liability to pay the royalties was incurred, and such royalties arc borne by such permanent establishment or fixed base, then such royalties shall be deemed to arise in the State in which the permanent establishment or fixed base is situated.

6. Where, by reason of a special relationship between the payer and the beneficial owner or between both of them and some other person, the amount of the royalties, having regard to the use, right or information for which they are paid, exceeds the amount which would have been agreed upon by the payer and the beneficial owner in the absence of such relationship, the provisions of this Article shall apply only to the last-mentioned amount. In such case, the excess part of the payments shall remain taxable according to the laws of each Contracting State, due regard being had to the other provisions of this Convention.

Article 13

CAPITAL GAINS

1. Gains derived by a resident of a Contracting State from the alienation of immovable property referred to in Article 6 and situated in the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

2. Gains from the alienation of movable property forming part of the business property of a permanent establishment which an enterprise of a Contracting State has in the other Contracting State or of movable property pertaining to a fixed base available to a resident of a Contracting State in the other Contracting State for the purpose of performing independent personal services, including such gains from the alienation of such a permanent establishment (alone or with the whole enterprise) or of such fixed base, may be taxed in that other State.

3. Gains from the alienation of ships, boats, aircraft or road-transport vehicles operated in international traffic or movable property pertaining to the operation of such ships, boats, aircraft or road-transport vehicles, shall be taxable only in the Contracting State in which the place of effective management of the enterprise is situated.

4. Gains from the alienation of any property other than that referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be taxable only in the Contracting State of which the alienator is a resident.

Article 14

INDEPENDENT PERSONAL SERVICES

1. Income derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of professional services or other activities of an independent character shall be taxable only in that State unless he has a fixed base regularly available to him in the other Contracting State for the purpose of performing his activities. If he has such a fixed base, the income may be taxed in the other State but only so much of it as is attributable to that fixed base.

2. The term „professional services” includes especially independent scientific, literary, artistic, educational or teaching activities as well as the independent activities of physicians, lawyers, engineers, architects, dentists and accountants.

Article 15

DEPENDENT PERSONAL SERVICES

1. Subject to the provisions of Articles 16, 18, 19, 20 and 21, salaries, wages and other similar remuneration derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an employment shall be taxable only in that State unless the employment is exercised in the other Contracting State. If the employment is so exercised, such remuneration as is derived therefrom may be taxed in that other State.

2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, remuneration derived by a resident of a Contracting State in respect of an employment exercised in the other Contracting State shall be taxable only in the first-mentioned State if:

(1) the recipient is present in the other State for a period or periods not exceeding in the aggregate 183 days in any twelve month period commencing or ending in the fiscal year concerned; and

(2) the remuneration is paid by, or on behalf of, an employer who is not a resident of the other State; and

(3) the remuneration is not borne by a permanent establishment or a fixed base which the employer has in the other State.

3. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, remuneration derived in respect of an employment exercised aboard a ship, boat, aircraft or road-transport vehicle operated in international traffic may be taxed in the Contracting State in which the place of effective management of the enterprise is situated.

Article 16

DIRECTORS FEES

Directors’ fees and other similar payments derived by a resident of a Contracting State in his capacity as a member of the board of directors or any similar organ of a company which is a resident of the other Contracting State may be taxed in that other State.

Article 17

ARTISTES AND SPORTSMEN

1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 14 and 15, income derived by a resident of a Contracting State as an entertainer, such as a theatre, motion picture, radio or television artiste, or a musician, or as a sportsman, from his personal activities as such exercised in the other Contracting State, may be taxed in that other State.

2. Where income in respect of personal activities exercised by an entertainer or a sportsman in his capacity as such accrues not to the entertainer or sportsman himself but to another person, that income may, notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 7, 14 and 15, be taxed in the Contracting State in which the activities of the entertainer or sportsman are exercised.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, income mentioned in this Article shall be exempt from tax in the Contracting State in which the activity of the entertainer or sportsman is exercised provided that this activity is supported in a considerable part out of public funds of this State or of the other State or the activity is exercised under a cultural agreement or within the framework of a cultural or sports exchange programme approved by both Contracting States. In such a case, the income is taxable only in the Contracting State in which the artiste or the sportsman is a resident.

Article 18

PENSIONS

1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 19, pensions and other similar remuneration paid to a resident of a Contracting State in consideration of past employment shall be taxable only in that State.

2. Nothwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 pensions and other similar remuneration paid under the compulsory pension system of a Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State in consideration of past employment shall be taxable only in the first mentioned Contracting State.

Article 19

GOVERNMENT SERVICE

1. (1) Salaries, wages and other similar remuneration, other than a pension, paid by a Contracting State or a political subdivision or a local authority thereof to an individual in respect of services rendered to that State or subdivision or authority shall be taxable only in that State.

(2) However, such salaries, wages and other similar remuneration shall be taxable only in the other Contracting State if the services are rendered in that State and the individual is a resident of that State who:

- is a national of that State; or

- did not become a resident of that State solely for the purpose of rendering the services.

2. Any pension paid by, or out of funds created by, a Contracting State or a political subdivision or a local authority thereof to an individual in respect of services rendered to that State or subdivision or authority shall be taxable only in that State.

3. The provisions of Articles 15, 16, 17 and 18 shall apply to salaries, wages and other similar remuneration and to pensions, in respect of services rendered in connection with a business carried on by a Contracting State or a political subdivision or a local authority thereof.

Article 20

STUDENTS

1. Payments which a student or business apprentice who is or was immediately before visiting a Contracting State a resident of the other Contracting State and who is present in the first-mentioned State solely for the purpose of his education or training receives for the purpose of his maintenance, education or training shall not be taxed in that State, provided that such payments arise from sources outside that State.

2. In respect of grants, scholarships and remuneration from employment not covered by paragraph 1, a student or business apprentice referred to in paragraph 1 shall, in addition, be entitled during such education or training to the same exemptions, reliefs or reductions in respect of taxes available to residents of the Contracting State which he is visiting.

Article 21

PROFESSORS AND RESEARCHERS

1. An individual who visits a Contracting State for the purpose of teaching or carrying out research at a university, college, school or other recognized educational institution in that State and who is or was immediately before that visit a resident of the other Contracting State, shall be exempt from taxation in the first-mentioned Contracting State on remuneration for such teaching or research for a period not exceeding two years from the date of his first visit for that purpose, provided that such remuneration arise from sources outside that State.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to income from research if such research is undertaken not in the public interest but primarily for the private benefit of a specific person or persons.

Article 22

OTHER INCOME

1. Items of income of a resident of a Contracting State, wherever arising, not dealt with in the foregoing Articles of this Convention shall be taxable only in that State.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not apply to income, other than income from immovable property as defined in paragraph 2 of Article 6, if the beneficial owner of such income, being a resident of a Contracting State, carries on business in the other Contracting State through a permanent establishment situated therein, or performs in that other State independent personal services from a fixed base situated therein, and the right or property in respect of which the income is paid is effectively connected with such permanent establishment or fixed base. In such case the provisions of Article 7 or Article 14, as the case may be, shall apply.

Article 23

CAPITAL

1. Capital represented by immovable property referred to in Article 6, owned by a resident of a Contracting State and situated in the other Contracting State, may be taxed in that other State.

2. Capital represented by movable property forming part of the business property of a permanent establishment which an enterprise of a Contracting State has in the other Contracting State or by movable property pertaining to a fixed base available to a resident of a Contracting State in the other Contracting State for the purpose of performing independent personal services, may be taxed in that other State.

3. Capital represented by ships, boats, aircraft and road-transport vehicles operated in international traffic, and by movable property pertaining to the operation of such ships, boats, aircraft and road-transport vehicles shall be taxable only in the Contracting State in which the place of effective management of the enterprise is situated.

4. All other elements of capital of a resident of a Contracting State shall be taxable only in that State.

Article 24

ELIMINATION OF DOUBLE TAXATION

1. In Yugoslavia, double taxation shall be eliminated as follows:

Where a resident of Yugoslavia derives income or owns capital which, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, may be taxed in Hungary, Yugoslavia shall allow:

- as a deduction from the tax on the income of that resident, an amount equal to the income tax paid in Hungary;

- as a deduction from the tax on the capital of that resident, an amount equal to the capital tax paid in Hungary.

Such deduction in either case shall not, however, exceed that part of the income tax or capital tax, as computed before the deduction is given, which is attributable, as the case may be, to the income or the capital which may be taxed in Hungary.

2. In Hungary, double taxation shall be eliminated as follows:

(1) Where a resident of a Hungary derives income or owns capital which, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, may be taxed in Yugoslavia, Hungary shall, subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) and paragraph 3 exempt such income or capital from tax;

(2) Where a resident of Hungary derives items of income which, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 10, 11 and 12, may be taxed in Yugoslavia, Hungary shall allow as a deduction from the tax on the income of that resident an amount equal to the tax paid in Yugoslavia. Such deduction shall not, however, exceed that part of the tax, as computed before the deduction is given, which is attributable to such items of income derived from Yugoslavia.

3. Where in accordance with any provision of the Convention income derived or capital owned by a resident of a Contracting State is exempt from tax in that State, such State may nevertheless, in calculating the amount of tax on the remaining income or capital of such resident, take into account the exempted income or capital.

4. For the purpose of allowance as a credit in a Contracting State the tax paid in the other Contracting State shall be deemed to include the tax which is otherwise payable in that other State but has been reduced or waived by that State under its legal provisions for tax incentives.

Article 25

NON-DISCRIMINATION

1. Nationals of a Contracting State shall not be subjected in the other Contracting State to any taxation or any requirement connected therewith, which is other or more burdensome than the taxation and connected requirements to which nationals of that other State in the same circumstances, in particular with respect to residence, are or may be subjected. This provision shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1, also apply to persons who are not residents of one or both of the Contracting States.

2. The taxation on a permanent establishment which an enterprise of a Contracting State has in the other Contracting State shall not be less favourably levied in that other State than the taxation levied on enterprises of that other State carrying on the same activities. This provision shall not be construed as obliging a Contracting State to grant to residents of the other Contracting State any personal allowances, reliefs and reductions for taxation purposes on account of civil status or family responsibilities which it grants to its own residents.

3. Except where the provisions of Article 9, paragraph 6 of Article 11, or paragraph 6 of Article 12, apply, interest, royalties and other disbursements paid by an enterprise of a Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State shall, for the purpose of determining the taxable profits of such enterprise, be deductible under the same conditions as if they had been paid to a resident of the first-mentioned State. Similarly, any debts of an enterprise of a Contracting State to a resident of the other Contracting State shall, for the purpose of determining the taxable capital of such enterprise, be deductible under the same conditions as if they had been contracted to a resident of the first-mentioned State.

4. Enterprises of a Contracting State, the capital of which is wholly or partly owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by one or more residents of the other Contracting State, shall not be subjected in the first-mentioned State to any taxation or any requirement connected therewith which is other or more burdensome than the taxation and connected requirements to which other similar enterprises of the first-mentioned State are or may be subjected.

5. The provisions of this Article shall apply to the taxes referred to in Article 2.

Article 26

MUTUAL AGREEMENT PROCEDURE

1. Where a person considers that the actions of one or both of the Contracting States result or will result for him in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, he may, irrespective of the remedies provided by the domestic law of those States, present his case to the competent authority of the Contracting State of which he is a resident or, if his case comes under paragraph 1 of Article 25, to that of the Contracting State of which he is a national. The case must be presented within three years from the first notification of the action resulting in taxation not in accordance with the provisions of the Convention.

2. The competent authority shall endeavour, if the objection appears to it to be justified and if it is not itself able to arrive at a satisfactory solution, to resolve the case by mutual agreement with the competent authority of the other Contracting State, with a view to the avoidance of taxation which is not in accordance with this Convention. Any agreement reached shall be implemented notwithstanding any time limits in the domestic law of the Contracting States.

3. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall endeavour to resolve by mutual agreement any difficulties or doubts arising as to the interpretation or application of the Convention. They may also consult together for the elimination of double taxation in cases not provided for in the Convention.

4. The competent authorities of the Contracting States may communicate with each other directly, including through a joint commission consisting of their representatives, for the purpose of reaching an agreement in the sense of the preceding paragraphs.

Article 27

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

1. The competent authorities of the Contracting States shall exchange such information as is necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Convention or of the domestic laws of the Contracting States concerning taxes covered by the Convention insofar as the taxation thereunder is not contrary to the Convention, in particular for the prevention of fraud or evasion of such taxes. The exchange of information is not restricted by Article 1. Any information received by a Contracting State shall be treated as secret in the same manner as information obtained under the domestic laws of that State and shall be disclosed only to persons or authorities (including courts and administrative bodies) concerned with the assessment or collection of, the enforcement or prosecution in respect of, or the determination of appeals in relation to, the taxes covered by the Convention. Such persons or authorities shall use the information only for such purposes. They may disclose the information in public court proceedings or in judicial decisions. The information received shall be treated as secret on request of the Contracting State giving the information.

2. In no case shall the provisions of paragraph 1 be construed so as to impose on a Contracting State the obligation:

(1) to carry out administrative measures at variance with the laws and administrative practice of that or of the other Contracting State;

(2) to supply information which is not obtainable under the laws or in the normal course of the administration of that or of the other Contracting State;

(3) to supply information which would disclose any trade, business, industrial, commercial or professional secret or trade process, or information, the disclosure of which would be contrary to public policy (ordre public).

Article 28

MEMBERS OF DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS AND CONSULAR POSTS

Nothing in this Convention shall affect the fiscal privileges of members of diplomatic missions or consular posts under the general rules of international law or under the provisions of special agreements.

Article 29

ENTRY INTO FORCE

1. This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be exchanged.

2. The Convention shall enter into force on the date of exchange of instruments of ratification and its provisions shall have effect in respect of the taxes on income derived and the taxes on capital owned in each fiscal year beginning on or after the first day of January in the calendar year following that in which the instruments of ratification have been exchanged.

3. From the date when this Convention shall have effect, in the mutual relations between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Hungary, the application of the „Convention between the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Hungarian People,s Republic for the avoidance of double taxation with respect to taxes on income and on capital”, signed at Budapest on 17th October 1985 shall cease to have effect.

Article 30

TERMINATION

This Convention shall remain in force until terminated by a Contracting State. Either Contracting States may terminate the Convention, through diplomatic channels, by giving notice of termination at least six months before the end of any calendar year after the fifth year from the date of entry into force of the Convention. In such event, the Convention shall cease to have effect in respect of taxes on income derived and the taxes on capital owned in each fiscal year beginning on or after the first day of January in the calendar year following that in which the notice of termination has been given.

IN WITNESS whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have signed this Convention.

DONE at Budapest this 20 day of June 2001 in two originals, in English language, both originals being equally authentic.

 FOR THE REPUBLIC OF HUNGARY

 FOR THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA

Egyezmény a Magyar Köztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság között a kettős adóztatás elkerüléséről a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén

A Magyar Köztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság attól az óhajtól vezetve, hogy Egyezményt kössenek a kettős adóztatás elkerüléséről a jövedelem- és vagyonadók területén, megállapodtak a következőkben:

1. Cikk

Személyi hatály

Az Egyezmény azokra a személyekre terjed ki, akik az egyik vagy mindkét Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségűek.

2. Cikk

Az Egyezmény hatálya alá tartozó adók

1. Az Egyezmény azokra a jövedelem- és vagyonadókra terjed ki, amelyeket a beszedés módjára való tekintet nélkül az egyik Szerződő Állam vagy politikai egységei vagy helyi hatóságai vetnek ki.

2. Jövedelem- és vagyonadóknak tekintendők mindazok az adók, amelyeket a teljes jövedelem vagy teljes vagyon, illetve a jövedelem vagy vagyon részei után vetnek ki, ideértve az ingó vagy az ingatlan vagyon elidegenítéséből származó nyereség utáni adókat, a vállalkozások által fizetett bérek és fizetések teljes összege utáni adókat, valamint az értéknövelési adókat.

3. Azok a jelenleg létező adók, amelyekre az Egyezmény kiterjed, különösen a következők:

Jugoszláviában:

(1) a nyereségadó,

(2) a jövedelemadó,

(3) a vagyonadó,

(4) a nemzetközi szállításból származó jövedelem adója

(a továbbiakban: „jugoszláv adó”),

Magyarországon:

(1) a személyi jövedelemadó,

(2) a társasági adó,

(3) az osztalékadó,

(4) a telekadó,

(5) az építményadó

(a továbbiakban: „magyar adó”).

4. Az Egyezmény kiterjed minden olyan azonos vagy lényegét tekintve hasonló adóra is, amelyet az Egyezmény aláírása után a jelenleg létező adók mellett vagy azok helyett vezetnek be. A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai értesíteni fogják egymást a vonatkozó adójogszabályaikban végrehajtott lényeges változtatásokról.

3. Cikk

Általános meghatározások

1. Az Egyezmény alkalmazásában:

(1) a „Jugoszlávia” kifejezés a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaságot jelenti, és földrajzi értelemben véve Jugoszlávia szárazföldjét, beltengerét és a parti tenger tengerszorosát, a felette levő légteret, valamint a nyílt tenger parti tenger legkülső határán kívüli részének a tengerfenekét és altalaját, amely felett Jugoszlávia azok természeti kincseinek feltárása és kiaknázása céljából belső jogszabályaival és a nemzetközi joggal összhangban szuverén jogait gyakorolja;

(2) a „Magyarország” kifejezés a Magyar Köztársaságot és földrajzi értelemben véve a Magyar Köztársaság területét jelenti;

(3) „az egyik Szerződő Állam” és a „másik Szerződő Állam” kifejezés Jugoszláviát vagy Magyarországot jelenti a szövegösszefüggésnek megfelelően;

(4) az „állampolgár” kifejezés a következőket jelenti:

- minden olyan magánszemélyt, aki az egyik Szerződő Államban állampolgársággal rendelkezik;

- minden olyan jogi személyt, társulást, egyesülést vagy más jogalanyt, amely ezt a jogállását az egyik Szerződő Államban hatályban lévő jogszabályokból nyeri;

(5) a „személy” kifejezés magában foglalja a természetes személyt, a társaságot és minden más személyi egyesülést;

(6) a „társaság” kifejezés jogi személyeket vagy egyéb olyan jogalanyokat jelent, amelyek az adóztatás szempontjából jogi személyeknek tekintendők;

(7) az „egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozása” és „a másik Szerződő Állam vállalkozása” kifejezések az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy, illetve a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy által folytatott vállalkozást jelentik;

(8) a „nemzetközi forgalom” kifejezés az egyik Szerződő Államban tényleges üzletvezetési hellyel rendelkező vállalkozás által üzemeltetett hajó, légi jármű vagy közúti szállítást végző jármű igénybevételével végzett bármilyen szállítást jelent, kivéve, ha a hajót, légi járművet vagy a közúti szállítást végző járművet kizárólag a másik Szerződő Államban lévő helyek között üzemeltetik;

(9) az „illetékes hatóság” kifejezés a következőket jelenti:

- Jugoszlávia esetében a Pénzügyminisztériumot vagy meghatalmazott képviselőjét;

- Magyarország esetében a pénzügyminisztert vagy meghatalmazott képviselőjét.

2. Az Egyezménynek az egyik Szerződő Állam által történő alkalmazásánál az Egyezményben meghatározás nélkül szereplő kifejezéseknek olyan jelentésük van, mint amit ennek az Államnak a jogszabályaiban jelentenek azokra az adókra vonatkozóan, amelyekre az Egyezmény alkalmazást nyer és ezen Állam adójogszabályai szerinti meghatározás lesz az irányadó az Állam egyéb jogszabályaiban található meghatározással szemben.

4. Cikk

Belföldi illetőségű személy

1. Az Egyezmény alkalmazásában az „egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy” kifejezés olyan személyt jelent, aki ennek a Szerződő Államnak a jogszabályai szerint lakóhelye, székhelye, bejegyzésének helye, üzletvezetési helye vagy bármilyen más hasonló ismérv alapján adóköteles, és ezen kívül magában foglalja ezt az Államot és annak bármely politikai egységét vagy helyi hatóságát. Ez a kifejezés azonban nem foglalja magába azokat a személyeket, akik ebben az Államban kizárólag az ebben az Államban lévő forrásokból származó jövedelem vagy vagyon alapján adókötelesek.

2. Amennyiben egy magánszemély az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései értelmében mindkét Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű, helyzetét az alábbiak szerint kell meghatározni:

(1) csak abban az Államban tekintendő belföldi illetőségűnek, amelyen állandó lakóhellyel rendelkezik; amennyiben mindkét Államban rendelkezik állandó lakóhellyel, csak abban az Államban tekintendő belföldi illetőségűnek, amellyel személyi és gazdasági kapcsolatai szorosabbak (a létérdekek központja);

(2) amennyiben nem határozható meg, hogy melyik Államban van létérdekeinek a központja, vagy ha egyik Államban sem rendelkezik állandó lakóhellyel, csak abban az Államban tekintendő belföldi illetőségűnek, amelyben szokásos tartózkodási helye van;

(3) amennyiben mindkét Szerződő Államban van szokásos tartózkodási helye, vagy egyikben sincs, csak abban az Államban tekintendő belföldi illetőségűnek, amelynek állampolgára;

(4) amennyiben mindkét Szerződő Állam állampolgára, vagy egyiké sem, a Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai kölcsönös egyetértéssel rendezik a kérdést.

3. Amennyiben az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései értelmében valamely nem magánszemély mindkét Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű, csak abban a Szerződő Államban tekintendő belföldi illetőségűnek, amelyben tényleges üzletvezetésének helye van.

5. Cikk

Telephely

1. Az Egyezmény alkalmazásában a „telephely” kifejezés olyan állandó üzleti helyet jelent, amelyen keresztül a vállalkozás üzleti tevékenységét egészben vagy részben kifejti.

2. A „telephely” kifejezés magában foglalja különösen:

(1) az üzletvezetés helyét;

(2) a fiókot;

(3) az irodát;

(4) a gyártelepet;

(5) a műhelyt; és

(6) a bányát, az olaj- és földgázkutat, a kőfejtőt és a természeti kincsek kiaknázására szolgáló bármely más telepet.

3. Az építési terület, az építkezési vagy szerelési munkálatok csak akkor képeznek telephelyet, ha az tizenkét hónapnál tovább tart.

4. E Cikk előző rendelkezéseire tekintet nélkül nem minősül „telephely”-nek:

(1) létesítmények használata kizárólag a vállalkozás javainak vagy áruinak raktározása, kiállítása vagy leszállítása céljára;

(2) készletek tartása a vállalkozás javaiból vagy áruiból kizárólag raktározás, kiállítás vagy leszállítás céljára;

(3) készletek tartása a vállalkozás javaiból vagy áruiból kizárólag abból a célból, hogy azokat egy másik vállalkozás feldolgozza;

(4) állandó üzleti hely fenntartása, kizárólag arra a célra, hogy a vállalkozás részére javakat vagy árukat vásároljanak, vagy információkat szerezzenek;

(5) állandó üzleti hely fenntartása kizárólag arra a célra, hogy a vállalkozás részére bármilyen más előkészítő vagy kisegítő jellegű tevékenységet folytassanak;

(6) állandó üzleti hely fenntartása kizárólag arra a célra, hogy az (1)-(5) pontokban említett tevékenységek valamilyen kombinációját végezze, feltéve, hogy az állandó üzleti helynek az ilyen kombinációból származó teljes tevékenysége előkészítő vagy kisegítő jellegű.

5. Tekintet nélkül az 1. és 2. bekezdések rendelkezéseire, ha egy személy - kivéve a független képviselőt, akire a 6. bekezdés rendelkezései alkalmazandók - egy vállalkozás érdekében tevékenykedik, és felhatalmazása van, amellyel rendszeresen él, arra, hogy a vállalkozás nevében az egyik Szerződő Államban szerződéseket kössön, akkor úgy tekintendő, hogy ennek a vállalkozásnak telephelye van ebben az Államban minden olyan tevékenység tekintetében, amelyeket ez a személy a vállalkozás érdekében végez, kivéve, ha az ilyen személy tevékenysége azokra a 4. bekezdésben említett tevékenységekre korlátozódik, amelyek, ha azokat egy állandó üzleti helyen keresztül fejtenék ki, az említett bekezdés rendelkezései értelmében nem tennék ezt az állandó üzleti helyet telephellyé.

6. Egy vállalkozást nem lehet úgy tekinteni, mintha annak az egyik Szerződő Államban telephelye lenne csupán azért, mert tevékenységét ebben az Államban alkusz, bizományos vagy más független képviselő útján fejti ki, feltéve, hogy ezek a személyek rendes üzleti tevékenységük keretében járnak el.

7. Az a tény, hogy az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű társaság olyan társaságot ellenőriz, vagy olyan társaság ellenőrzése alatt áll, amely a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű, vagy üzleti tevékenységet fejt ki ebben a másik Államban (akár telephely útján, akár más módon), önmagában még nem teszi egyik társaságot sem a másik telephelyévé.

6. Cikk

Ingatlan vagyonból származó jövedelem

1. Az a jövedelem, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy a másik Szerződő Államban fekvő ingatlan vagyonból (beleértve a mezőgazdaságból és az erdőgazdálkodásból származó jövedelmet) élvez, megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

2. Az „ingatlan vagyon” kifejezésnek olyan jelentése van, amit annak a Szerződő Államnak jogszabályai szerint jelent, amelyikben a szóban forgó vagyon fekszik. Ez a kifejezés minden esetben magában foglalja az ingatlan vagyon tartozékának minősülő vagyont, a mezőgazdaságban és az erdőgazdálkodásban használatos berendezéseket és az állatállományt, azokat a jogokat, amelyekre a földtulajdonra vonatkozó magánjogi rendelkezések nyernek alkalmazást, az ingatlan vagyon haszonélvezeti jogát, valamint az ásványlelőhelyek, források és más természeti erőforrások kitermelésének vagy kitermelési jogának ellenértékeként járó változó vagy állandó térítésekhez való jogot; hajók, légi járművek és közúti szállítást végző járművek nem tekintendők ingatlan vagyonnak.

3. Az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései ingatlan vagyon közvetlen használatából, bérbeadásából vagy használatának minden más formájából származó jövedelemre is alkalmazandók.

4. Az 1. és 3. bekezdés rendelkezései a vállalkozás ingatlan vagyonából származó jövedelemre és önálló tevékenység gyakorlására szolgáló ingatlan vagyonból származó jövedelemre is alkalmazandók.

7. Cikk

Vállalkozási nyereség

1. Az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának nyeresége csak ebben az Államban adóztatható, kivéve, ha a vállalkozás a másik Szerződő Államban egy ott lévő telephely útján üzleti tevékenységet fejt ki. Amennyiben a vállalkozás ily módon fejt ki üzleti tevékenységet, a vállalkozás nyeresége megadóztatható a másik Államban, de csak olyan mértékben, amilyen mértékben az ennek a telephelynek tudható be.

2. A 3. bekezdés rendelkezéseinek fenntartásával, ha az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozása a másik Szerződő Államban egy ott lévő telephelye útján üzleti tevékenységet fejt ki, akkor mindkét Szerződő Államban azt a nyereséget kell ennek a telephelynek betudni, amelyet akkor érhetne el, ha önálló és elkülönült vállalkozásként azonos vagy hasonló tevékenységet végezne azonos vagy hasonló feltételek mellett, és teljesen függetlenként tartana fenn üzleti kapcsolatot azzal a vállalkozással, amelynek telephelye.

3. A telephely nyereségének megállapításánál levonhatók a telephely miatt felmerült költségek, beleértve az így felmerült üzletvezetési és általános ügyviteli költségeket, függetlenül attól, hogy abban az Államban merültek-e fel, ahol a telephely található, vagy máshol.

4. Amennyiben az egyik Szerződő Államban a telephelynek betudható nyereséget a vállalkozás teljes nyereségének a különböző részegységek közötti arányos megosztása alapján szokták megállapítani, úgy a 2. bekezdés nem zárja ki, hogy ez a Szerződő Állam a megadóztatandó nyereséget a szokásos arányos megosztás alapján állapítsa meg; az alkalmazott arányos megosztási módszernek azonban olyannak kell lennie, hogy az eredmény összhangban legyen az e cikkben foglalt elvekkel.

5. Nem tudható be nyereség a telephelynek csupán azért, mert a telephely javakat vagy árukat vásárol a vállalkozásnak.

6. Az előző bekezdések alkalmazásában a telephelynek betudható nyereséget évről évre azonos módon kell megállapítani, hacsak elégséges és alapos ok nincs az ellenkezőjére.

7. Amennyiben a nyereség olyan jövedelemtételeket tartalmaz, amelyekkel a jelen Egyezmény más cikkei külön foglalkoznak, úgy azoknak a cikkeknek a rendelkezéseit e cikk rendelkezései nem érintik.

8. Cikk

Nemzetközi forgalom

1. A hajók, légi járművek vagy közúti szállítást végző járművek nemzetközi forgalomban történő üzemeltetéséből származó nyereség csak abban a Szerződő Államban adóztatható, amelyben a vállalkozás tényleges üzletvezetésének a helye van.

2. Ha egy hajózási vállalkozás tényleges üzletvezetésének helye egy hajón van, úgy e hely abban a Szerződő Államban levőnek tekintendő, amelyikben a hajó hazai kikötője található, vagy ha nincs ilyen hazai kikötő, akkor abban a Szerződő Államban, amelyikben a hajó üzemeltetője belföldi illetőségű.

3. Az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései alkalmazandók valamely poolban, közös üzemeltetésben vagy nemzetközi üzemeltetésű szervezetben való részvételből származó nyereségre is.

9. Cikk

Kapcsolt vállalkozások

Amennyiben

(1) az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozása közvetlenül vagy közvetve a másik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának vezetésében, ellenőrzésében vagy tőkéjében részesedik, vagy

(2) ugyanazok a személyek közvetlenül vagy közvetve az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának és a másik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának vezetésében, ellenőrzésében vagy tőkéjében részesednek,

és bármelyik esetben a két vállalkozás egymás közötti kereskedelmi vagy pénzügyi kapcsolataiban olyan feltételekben állapodik meg vagy olyan feltételeket szab, amelyek eltérnek azoktól, amelyekben független vállalkozások egymással megállapodnának, úgy az a nyereség, amelyet a vállalkozások egyike e feltételek nélkül elért volna, de e feltételek miatt nem ért el, beszámítható ennek a vállalkozásnak a nyereségébe, és megfelelően megadóztatható.

10. Cikk

Osztalék

1. Az osztalék, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű társaság a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek fizet, megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

2. Mindazonáltal ez az osztalék abban a Szerződő Államban is, amelyben az osztalékot fizető társaság belföldi illetőségű, ennek a Szerződő Államnak a jogszabályai szerint megadóztatható, ha azonban az osztalék haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű, az így megállapított adó nem haladhatja meg:

(1) az osztalék bruttó összegének 5%-át, ha a haszonhúzó egy olyan társaság, amely az osztalékot fizető társaság tőkéjében legalább 25%-os közvetlen részesedéssel bír;

(2) az osztalék bruttó összegének 15%-át minden más esetben.

A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai, amennyiben szükséges, kölcsönös egyetértéssel rendezik e korlátozások alkalmazási módját.

E bekezdés nem érinti a társaság adóztatását azon nyereség után, amelyből az osztalékot fizetik.

3. E cikk alkalmazásában az „osztalék” kifejezés részvényekből vagy más nyereségből való részesedést biztosító jogokból - kivéve a hitelkövetelések - származó jövedelmet, valamint egyéb társasági jogokból származó olyan jövedelmet jelent, amely annak az Államnak az adózási jogszabályai szerint, amelyben a nyereséget felosztó társaság belföldi illetőségű, a részvényekből származó jövedelemmel azonos elbánás alá esik.

4. Az 1. és 2. bekezdés rendelkezései nem alkalmazandók, ha az osztaléknak az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban, amelyben az osztalékot fizető társaság belföldi illetőségű, egy ott lévő telephely útján üzleti tevékenységet fejt ki, vagy önálló tevékenységet végez ebben a másik Államban egy ott lévő bázis segítségével, és az érdekeltség, amelyre tekintettel az osztalékot fizetik, ténylegesen ehhez a telephelyhez vagy állandó bázishoz kapcsolódik. Ilyenkor az esettől függően a 7. vagy a 14. Cikk rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni.

5. Ha az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű társaság nyereséget vagy jövedelmet élvez a másik Szerződő Államból, úgy ez a másik Állam nem adóztathatja meg a társaság által kifizetett osztalékot, kivéve, ha az osztalékot ebben a másik Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek fizetik, vagy ha az érdekeltség, amelyre tekintettel az osztalékot fizetik, ténylegesen a másik Államban lévő telephelyhez vagy állandó bázishoz kapcsolódik, sem pedig a társaság fel nem osztott nyereségét nem terhelheti a társaság fel nem osztott nyeresége után kivetett adóval, még akkor sem, ha a kifizetett osztalék vagy a fel nem osztott nyereség egészben vagy részben ebben a másik Államban keletkező nyereségből vagy jövedelemből áll.

11. Cikk

Kamat

1. A kamat, amely az egyik Szerződő Államban keletkezik, és amelyet a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek fizetnek, ebben a másik Államban adóztatható.

2. Mindazonáltal ez a kamat ebben a Szerződő Államban is, amelyben keletkezik, ennek az Államnak a jogszabályai szerint megadóztatható, de ha a kamat haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű, az így megállapított adó nem haladhatja meg a kamat bruttó összegének 10 százalékát. A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai, amennyiben szükséges, kölcsönös egyetértéssel rendezik e korlátozás alkalmazási módját.

3. E cikk alkalmazásában a „kamat” kifejezés mindenfajta hitelkövetelésből származó jövedelmet jelent, akár van jelzáloggal biztosítva, akár nem, és akár ad jogot az adós nyereségéből való részesedésre, akár nem, és magában foglalja különösen az állami értékpapírokból származó jövedelmet, a kötvényekből vagy adósságlevelekből származó jövedelmet, beleértve az ilyen értékpapírokhoz, kötvényekhez vagy adósságlevelekhez kapcsolódó prémiumokat és jutalmakat. E cikk alkalmazásában a késedelmes fizetés utáni bírságok nem tekintendők kamatnak.

4. Az 1. és 2. bekezdés rendelkezései nem alkalmazandók, ha a kamat egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban, amelyben a kamat keletkezik, egy ott lévő telephely útján üzleti tevékenységet fejt ki, vagy önálló tevékenységet folytat ebben a másik Államban egy ott lévő állandó bázis segítségével, és a követelés, amely után a kamatot fizetik, ténylegesen ehhez a telephelyhez vagy állandó bázishoz kapcsolódik. Ilyenkor az esettől függően a 7. vagy a 14. Cikk rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni.

5. A kamatot az egyik Szerződő Államban keletkezőnek kell tekinteni, ha a kifizető ebben az Államban belföldi illetőségű személy. Mindazonáltal, ha a kamatot fizető személynek, akár belföldi illetőségű valamely Szerződő Államban, akár nem, az egyik Szerződő Államban telephelye vagy állandó bázisa van, amellyel kapcsolatban az adósság, amelynek alapján a kamatot fizetik, felmerült és ezt a kamatterhet az a telephely vagy állandó bázis viseli, akkor a kamatot abban a Szerződő Államban kell keletkezőnek tekinteni, melyben a telephely vagy állandó bázis található.

6. Ha a kamatot fizető személy és a kamat haszonhúzója, vagy kettejük és egy harmadik személy között különleges kapcsolat áll fenn, és emiatt a kamat összege ahhoz a követeléshez mérten, amely után fizetik, meghaladja azt az összeget, amelyben a kamatot fizető és a kamat haszonhúzója ilyen kapcsolatok hiányában megállapodtak volna, úgy e Cikk rendelkezéseit csak az utóbb említett összegre kell alkalmazni. Ilyen esetben a kifizetett többletösszeg mindkét Szerződő Állam jogszabályai szerint adóztatható marad, az Egyezmény egyéb rendelkezéseinek figyelembevételével.

12. Cikk

Jogdíj

1. A jogdíj, amely az egyik Szerződő Államban keletkezik, és amelyet a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek fizetnek, ebben a másik Államban adóztatható.

2. Mindazonáltal ez a jogdíj ebben a Szerződő Államban is, amelyben keletkezik, ennek az Államnak a jogszabályai szerint megadóztatható, de ha a jogdíj haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű, az így megállapított adó nem haladhatja meg a jogdíj bruttó összegének 10 százalékát. A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai, amennyiben szükséges, kölcsönös egyetértéssel rendezik e korlátozás alkalmazási módját.

3. E cikk alkalmazásában a „jogdíj” kifejezés minden olyan jellegű kifizetést jelent, amelyet irodalmi, művészeti vagy tudományos alkotások - beleértve a mozgóképfilmeket, televíziós vagy rádióközvetítésre szolgáló filmeket, kép- vagy hanghordozó szalagokat - szerzői joga, bármilyen szabadalom, védjegy, minta vagy modell, terv, titkos formula vagy eljárás használatának vagy használati jogának vagy ipari, kereskedelmi vagy tudományos felszerelés használatának vagy használati jogának vagy ipari, kereskedelmi vagy tudományos tapasztalatra vonatkozó információkért ellenértékeként fizetnek.

4. Az 1. és 2. bekezdés rendelkezései nem alkalmazandók, ha a jogdíj egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban, amelyben a jogdíj keletkezik, egy ott lévő telephely útján üzleti tevékenységet fejt ki, vagy önálló tevékenységet végez ebben a másik Államban egy ott lévő bázis segítségével, és a jog vagy vagyoni érték, amelyre tekintettel a jogdíjat fizetik, ténylegesen ehhez a telephelyhez vagy állandó bázishoz kapcsolódik. Ilyenkor az esettől függően a 7. vagy a 14. Cikk rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni.

5. Jogdíj akkor tekintendő a Szerződő Államban keletkezőnek, ha a kifizető ebben a Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy. Ha azonban a jogdíjat fizető személynek, függetlenül attól, hogy belföldi illetőségű az egyik Szerződő Államban vagy nem, az egyik Szerződő Államban telephelye vagy állandó bázisa van, amellyel kapcsolatban a jogdíj fizetésére vonatkozó kötelezettség felmerült, és ezt a jogdíjat ez a telephely vagy állandó bázis viseli, úgy az ilyen jogdíj abban az Államban keletkezőnek tekintendő, amelyben a telephely vagy állandó bázis van.

6. Ha a jogdíjat fizető személy és a jogdíj haszonhúzója, vagy kettejük és egy harmadik személy között különleges kapcsolatok állnak fenn, és a jogdíj összege, azon használathoz, joghoz vagy információhoz mérten, amiért fizetik, meghaladja azt az összeget, amelyben a jogdíjat fizető és a jogdíj haszonhúzója ilyen kapcsolatok hiányában megállapodtak volna, úgy e Cikk rendelkezéseit csak az utóbb említett összegre kell alkalmazni. Ilyen esetben a kifizetett többletösszeg mindkét Szerződő Állam jogszabályai szerint adóztatható marad, az Egyezmény egyéb rendelkezéseinek figyelembevételével.

13. Cikk

Vagyon elidegenítéséből származó nyereség

1. Az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek a 6. Cikkben meghatározott és a másik Szerződő Államban fekvő ingatlan vagyona elidegenítéséből származó nyeresége megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

2. Az a nyereség, amely olyan ingó vagyon elidegenítéséből származik, amely az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozása másik Szerződő Államban lévő telephelye üzleti vagyonának része, vagy amely egy olyan állandó bázishoz tartozik, amellyel az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy önálló tevékenység végzése céljára a másik Szerződő Államban rendelkezik, beleértve az ilyen telephelynek (akár a vállalkozással együttesen, akár attól függetlenül történő) vagy egy ilyen állandó bázisnak az elidegenítéséből elért nyereséget, megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

3. A nemzetközi forgalomban üzemeltetett hajók, légi járművek vagy közúti szállítást végző járművek, vagy az ilyen hajók, légi járművek vagy közúti szállítást végző járművek üzemeltetését szolgáló ingó vagyon elidegenítéséből származó nyereség csak abban a Szerződő Államban adóztatható, amelyben a vállalkozás tényleges üzletvezetésének helye van.

4. Az 1., 2. és 3. bekezdésekben nem említett vagyon elidegenítéséből származó nyereség csak abban a Szerződő Államban adóztatható, amelyben az elidegenítő belföldi illetőségű.

14. Cikk

Önálló tevékenység

1. Az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy szabad foglalkozásból vagy más önálló tevékenységből származó jövedelme csak ebben az Államban adóztatható, kivéve, ha a személynek tevékenysége kifejtéséhez a másik Szerződő Államban rendszeresen állandó bázis áll rendelkezésére. Amennyiben ilyen állandó bázissal rendelkezik, a jövedelem megadóztatható a másik Államban, de csak annyiban, amennyiben az ennek az állandó bázisnak tudható be.

2. A „szabad foglalkozás” kifejezés magában foglalja különösen az önállóan kifejtett tudományos, irodalmi, művészeti, nevelési vagy oktatási tevékenységet, valamint az orvosok, jogászok, mérnökök, építészek, fogorvosok és könyvszakértők önálló tevékenységét.

15. Cikk

Nem önálló tevékenység

1. A 16., 18., 19., 20. és 21. Cikkek rendelkezéseinek fenntartásával, a fizetés, a bér és más hasonló térítés, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy nem önálló tevékenységért kap, csak ebben az Államban adóztatható, kivéve, ha a tevékenységet a másik Szerződő Államban végzik. Amennyiben a tevékenységet ott végzik, úgy az ezért kapott térítés megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

2. Tekintet nélkül az 1. bekezdés rendelkezéseire, az a díjazás, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy a másik Szerződő Államban végzett nem önálló tevékenységre tekintettel kap, csak az elsőként említett Államban adóztatható, ha

(1) a kedvezményezett a másik Államban nem tartózkodik egyfolytában vagy megszakításokkal összesen 183 napnál hosszabb időszakot az adott adóévben kezdődő vagy végződő bármely tizenkét hónapos időtartamon belül, és

(2) a díjazást olyan munkaadó fizeti, vagy azt olyan munkaadó nevében fizetik, aki nem belföldi illetőségű a másik Államban, és

(3) a díjazást nem a munkaadónak a másik Államban lévő telephelye vagy állandó bázisa viseli.

3. Tekintet nélkül e cikk előző rendelkezéseire, a nemzetközi forgalomban üzemeltetett hajó, légi jármű vagy közúti szállítást végző jármű, fedélzetén végzett nem önálló tevékenységért járó díjazás megadóztatható abban a Szerződő Államban, amelyben a vállalkozás tényleges üzletvezetésének helye van.

16. Cikk

Igazgatók tiszteletdíja

Az igazgatói tiszteletdíj és más hasonló kifizetés, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy olyan minőségében élvez, mint a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű társaság igazgatótanácsának vagy bármely hasonló szervének tagja, megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

17. Cikk

Művészek és sportolók

1. Tekintet nélkül a 14. és 15. Cikkek rendelkezéseire, az a jövedelem, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy előadóművészként, színpadi, film-, rádiós, televíziós vagy zeneművészként, sportolóként élvez a másik Szerződő Államban ilyen minőségében kifejtett személyes tevékenységéből, megadóztatható ebben a másik Államban.

2. Amennyiben egy előadóművész vagy egy sportoló által ilyen minőségében kifejtett személyes tevékenységéből származó jövedelem nem magánál az előadóművésznél vagy a sportolónál, hanem egy másik személynél jelentkezik, úgy ez a jövedelem, tekintet nélkül a 7., 14. és 15. Cikkek rendelkezéseire, megadóztatható abban a Szerződő Államban, amelyben az előadóművész vagy sportoló a tevékenységét kifejti.

3. Tekintet nélkül e cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésének rendelkezéseire, az e cikkben említett jövedelmet ki kell venni az adózás alól abban a Szerződő Államban, amelyikben az előadóművész vagy sportoló tevékenysége kifejtésre kerül, feltéve, hogy ezt a tevékenységet jelentős részben ennek az Államnak vagy a másik Államnak közalapjaiból támogatják vagy a tevékenységet kulturális megállapodás vagy kulturális vagy sport csereprogram keretében végzik, amelyet mind a két Szerződő Állam jóváhagyott. Ilyen esetben a jövedelem csak abban a Szerződő Államban adóztatható, amelyikben az előadóművész vagy sportoló belföldi illetőségű.

18. Cikk

Nyugdíjak

1. A 19. Cikk 2. bekezdése rendelkezéseinek fenntartásával a nyugdíj és más hasonló térítés, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Államban illetőséggel bíró személynek korábbi, nem önálló munkáért fizetnek, csak ebben az Államban adóztatható.

2. Tekintet nélkül az 1. bekezdés rendelkezéseire, az a nyugdíj és más hasonló térítés, amelyeket az egyik Szerződő Állam kötelező nyugdíjrendszere alapján fizetnek korábbi munkaviszonyra tekintettel a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek, csak az elsőként említett Szerződő Államban adóztathatók.

19. Cikk

Közszolgálat

1. (1) Fizetések, bérek és más, nem nyugdíj jellegű díjazások, amelyeket az egyik Szerződő Állam, vagy politikai egysége, vagy helyi hatósága fizet magánszemélynek, az ezen Államnak, vagy egységnek, vagy helyi hatóságnak teljesített szolgálatért, csak ebben az Államban adóztathatók.

(2) Ezen fizetések, bérek és más hasonló jellegű díjazások azonban csak a másik Szerződő Államban adóztathatók, ha a szolgálatot abban az Államban teljesítették, és a magánszemély abban az Államban olyan belföldi illetőségű személy, aki

- ennek az Államnak az állampolgára,

- nem kizárólag a szolgálat teljesítése céljából vált ebben az Államban belföldi illetőségű személlyé.

2. Minden olyan nyugdíj, amely az egyik Szerződő Állam vagy politikai egysége vagy helyi hatósága által vagy az általuk létesített alapokból kerül kifizetésre egy magánszemély részére az ezen Államnak vagy politikai egységnek vagy hatóságnak teljesített szolgálatért, csak ebben az Államban adóztatható.

3. Az egyik Szerződő Állam vagy politikai egysége vagy helyi hatósága által folytatott üzleti tevékenységgel kapcsolatosan teljesített szolgálatért kifizetett fizetésekre, bérekre és más hasonló jellegű díjazásra és nyugdíjra a 15., 16., 17. és 18. Cikkek rendelkezései alkalmazandók.

20. Cikk

Tanulók

1. Azok a kifizetések, amelyeket olyan tanulók, ipari és kereskedelmi tanulók vagy gyakornokok kapnak ellátásukra, tanulmányi vagy képzési célokra, akik közvetlenül az egyik Szerződő Államba való utazás előtt a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségűek voltak vagy jelenleg is azok, és akik az elsőként említett Államban kizárólag tanulmányi vagy képzési célból tartózkodnak, nem adóztathatók ebben az Államban, amennyiben az ilyen kifizetések ezen az Államon kívüli forrásokból származnak.

2. Az 1. bekezdésen kívül eső nem önálló munkából származó térítés, ösztöndíj vagy díjazás tekintetében az 1. bekezdésben említett tanulót, ipari és kereskedelmi tanulót vagy gyakornokot azon túlmenően az ilyen tanulmány vagy gyakorlat idejére adózás szempontjából ugyanazok a mentességek, kedvezmények vagy mérséklések illetik meg, mint az abban a Szerződő Államban illetőséggel bíró személyeket, amelyben a látogatást teszi.

21. Cikk

Tanárok és kutatók

1. Az a magánszemély, aki az egyik Szerződő Államban abból a célból tartózkodik, hogy ott tanítson vagy kutatást folytasson egyetemen, főiskolán, iskolán vagy egyéb elismert oktatási intézményben, és aki közvetlenül az egyik Szerződő Államba való utazása előtt a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű volt vagy jelenleg is az, adómentességet élvez, az elsőként említett Szerződő Államban az ilyen tanításért vagy kutatásért kapott térítés tekintetében az ezen célból történő odautazásának első napjától számított két évig, amennyiben az ilyen díjazás az utóbbi Államon kívüli forrásból származik.

2. A jelen cikk 1. bekezdésének rendelkezései nem vonatkoznak a kutatásból származó jövedelemre, amennyiben a kutatást nem a köz érdekében, hanem elsősorban egy meghatározott személy vagy személyek egyéni haszna érdekében végzik.

22. Cikk

Egyéb jövedelem

1. Az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy jövedelmének az Egyezmény előző cikkeiben nem tárgyalt részei, bárhol keletkeznek is, csak ebben az Államban adóztathatók.

2. Az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései nem terjednek ki a 6. Cikk 2. bekezdésében meghatározott ingatlan vagyonból származó jövedelmen kívüli jövedelmekre, amennyiben az ilyen jövedelmeknek az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű haszonhúzója a másik Szerződő Államban ott lévő telephelye révén üzleti tevékenységet folytat, vagy ott lévő állandó bázis segítségével szabad foglalkozást űz, és a jog vagy vagyon, amelyre tekintettel a jövedelmet fizetik, ténylegesen ehhez a telephelyhez vagy állandó bázishoz kapcsolódik. Ilyenkor az esettől függően a 7. vagy a 14. Cikk rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni.

23. Cikk

Vagyon

1. A 6. Cikkben említett olyan ingatlan vagyon, amelynek tulajdonosa az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy, és amely a másik Szerződő Államban fekszik, ebben a másik Államban adóztatható.

2. Az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának a másik Szerződő Államban lévő telephelyéhez tartozó üzleti vagyon részét képező ingó vagyon, vagy az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy számára a másik Szerződő Államban szabad foglalkozás céljára rendelkezésre álló állandó bázishoz tartozó ingó vagyon ebben a másik Szerződő Államban adóztatható.

3. A nemzetközi forgalomban üzemeltetett hajókból, légi járművekből vagy közúti szállítást végző járművekből álló vagyon és az ilyen hajók, légi járművek és közúti szállítást végző járművek üzemeltetéséhez szükséges ingó vagyon csak abban a Szerződő Államban adóztatható, amelyben a vállalkozás tényleges üzletvezetésének helye van.

4. Az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy vagyonának minden más része csak ebben az Államban adóztatható.

24. Cikk

A kettős adóztatás elkerülése

1. A kettős adóztatást Jugoszlávia esetében a következőképpen kell elkerülni:

Amennyiben Jugoszláviában belföldi illetőségű személy olyan jövedelmet élvez vagy olyan vagyon tulajdonosa, amely a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel összhangban Magyarországon adóztatható, Jugoszlávia lehetővé teszi

- az ilyen belföldi illetőségű személy jövedelmét terhelő adóból azon összeg levonását, amely megegyezik a Magyarországon megfizetett jövedelemadóval;

- az ilyen belföldi illetőségű személy vagyonát terhelő adóból azon összeg levonását, amely megegyezik a Magyarországon megfizetett vagyonadóval.

Az így levont összeg mindazonáltal nem haladhatja meg egyik esetben sem a levonás előtt számított jövedelemadónak, illetve vagyonadónak azt a részét, amely, az esettől függően, Magyarországon adóztatható jövedelemre, illetve vagyonra esik.

2. A kettős adóztatást Magyarország esetében a következőképpen kell elkerülni:

(1) amennyiben a Magyarországon belföldi illetőségű személy olyan jövedelmet élvez, vagy olyan vagyona van, amely az Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel összhangban Jugoszláviában adóztatható, Magyarország a (2) pontban és 3. bekezdésben foglalt rendelkezések fenntartásával mentesíti az ilyen jövedelmet vagy vagyont az adózás alól;

(2) amennyiben a Magyarországon belföldi illetőségű személy olyan jövedelemrészeket élvez, amelyek a 10., 11. és 12. Cikk rendelkezéseivel összhangban Jugoszláviában adóztathatók, Magyarország lehetővé teszi az ilyen belföldi illetőségű személy jövedelmét terhelő adóból azon összeg levonását, amely megegyezik a Jugoszláviában megfizetett adóval. Az így levont összeg azonban nem haladhatja meg a levonás előtt számított adónak azt a részét, amely a Jugoszláviából származó ilyen jövedelemrészekre esik.

3. Ha az Egyezmény bármely rendelkezésével összhangban az egyik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személy által élvezett jövedelem vagy tulajdonát képező vagyon mentesül az adó alól ebben az Államban, az ilyen Állam mindazonáltal az ilyen belföldi illetőségű személy többi jövedelme vagy vagyona utáni adó kiszámításánál figyelembe veheti a mentesített jövedelmet vagy vagyont.

4. Az egyik Szerződő Államban a beszámítás megengedése céljából a másik Szerződő Államban fizetett adót úgy kell tekinteni, hogy magában foglalja azt az adót, amely egyébként ebben a másik Államban fizetendő, de amelyet ez a másik Állam lecsökkentett, vagy amelyről lemondott adóösztönzési jogi előírásai szerint.

25. Cikk

Egyenlő elbánás

1. Az egyik Szerződő Állam állampolgárai nem vethetők a másik Szerződő Államban olyan adózás vagy azzal összefüggő kötelezettség alá, amely más vagy terhesebb, mint az az adózás vagy azzal összefüggő kötelezettség, amelynek ennek a másik Államnak az állampolgárai hasonló körülmények között, különösen az illetőségre tekintettel, alá vannak vagy alá lehetnek vetve. Ez a rendelkezés, az 1. Cikk rendelkezéseire való tekintet nélkül, azokra a személyekre is alkalmazandó, akik nem belföldi illetőségűek az egyik vagy mindkét Szerződő Államban.

2. Az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának a másik Szerződő Államban lévő telephelyét nem lehet kedvezőtlenebbül adóztatni ebben a másik Államban, mint e másik Állam azonos tevékenységet folytató vállalkozásait. Ez a rendelkezés nem értelmezendő oly módon, mintha az egyik Szerződő Állam köteles lenne a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személyek számára polgári jogállás vagy családi kötelezettség alapján bármilyen olyan személyi kedvezményt, mentességet vagy csökkentést biztosítani az adózás területén, mint amilyeneket a belföldi illetőségű személyei számára biztosít.

3. Azt az esetet kivéve, amikor a 9. Cikknek, a 11. Cikk 6. bekezdésének vagy a 12. Cikk 6. bekezdésének rendelkezései nyernek alkalmazást, az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozása által a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek kifizetett kamat, jogdíj és más költség az ilyen vállalkozás adóztatható nyereségének megállapításánál ugyanolyan feltételek mellett levonható, mintha ezeket az elsőként említett Államban belföldi illetőségű személynek fizették volna. Hasonlóképpen az egyik Szerződő Állam vállalkozásának a másik Szerződő Államban illetőséggel bíró személlyel szemben fennálló tartozásai ugyanolyan feltételek mellett levonhatók e vállalkozás adóztatható vagyonának megállapításánál, mintha ezek a tartozások az először említett Államban illetőséggel bíró személlyel szemben álltak volna fenn.

4. Az egyik Szerződő Állam olyan vállalkozásai, amelyeknek tőkéje egészben vagy részben, közvetlenül vagy közvetve a másik Szerződő Államban belföldi illetőségű egy vagy több személy tulajdonában vagy ellenőrzése alatt van, nem vethetők az elsőként említett Államban olyan adózás vagy azzal összefüggő kötelezettség alá, amely más vagy terhesebb, mint az az adózás és azzal összefüggő kötelezettségek, amelyeknek az elsőként említett Állam más hasonló vállalkozásai alá vannak vagy alá lehetnek vetve.

5. E cikk rendelkezései a 2. Cikkben hivatkozott adókra alkalmazandók.

26. Cikk

Egyeztető eljárás

1. Ha egy személy véleménye szerint az egyik vagy mindkét Szerződő Állam intézkedése olyan adózást eredményez vagy fog eredményezni számára, amely nincs összhangban ennek az Egyezménynek a rendelkezéseivel, úgy ezen Államok belső jogszabályaiban biztosított jogorvoslati lehetőségektől függetlenül az ügyet annak a Szerződő Államnak az illetékes hatósága elé terjesztheti, amelyikben belföldi illetőségű, vagy ha ügyére a 25. Cikk 1. bekezdése vonatkozik, annak a Szerződő Államnak az illetékes hatósága elé, amelynek állampolgára. Az ügyet az Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel összhangban nem lévő adóztatást eredményező intézkedésről szóló első értesítéstől számított három éven belül kell előterjeszteni.

2. Az illetékes hatóság, amennyiben a kifogást megalapozottnak találja, és önmaga nem képes kielégítő megoldást találni, törekedni fog arra, hogy az ügyet a másik Szerződő Állam illetékes hatóságával együtt kölcsönös egyetértéssel rendezze úgy, hogy elkerüljék az olyan adóztatást, amely nem áll összhangban az Egyezménnyel. Az így létrejött megállapodást alkalmazni kell, bármilyen határidőket írnak is elő a Szerződő Államok belső jogszabályai.

3. A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai törekedni fognak arra, hogy az Egyezmény értelmezésével vagy alkalmazásával kapcsolatos problémákat és kételyeket kölcsönös egyetértéssel oldják fel. Tanácskozhatnak továbbá egymással annak érdekében, hogy olyan esetekben is elkerüljék a kettős adóztatást, amelyekről az Egyezmény nem rendelkezik.

4. A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai egymással közvetlenül érintkezhetnek, beleértve a képviselőikből álló bizottság útján való érintkezést, abból a célból, hogy a megelőző bekezdések értelmében megállapodást érjenek el.

27. Cikk

Információcsere

1. A Szerződő Államok illetékes hatóságai megadják egymás számára azt a tájékoztatást, amely az Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek vagy a Szerződő Államokban az Egyezmény hatálya alá tartozó adókra vonatkozó belső jogszabályi rendelkezések végrehajtásához szükséges, amennyiben az ezek szerinti adózás nem ellentétes az Egyezménnyel, különösen az ilyen adókra vonatkozó adócsalás és adóztatás kijátszásának megakadályozása érdekében. A kölcsönös tájékoztatást az 1. Cikk nem korlátozza. A Szerződő Állam a kapott tájékoztatást ugyanúgy titokként kezeli, mint az ennek az Államnak a belső jogszabályai szerint megszerzett információt, és csak olyan személyek vagy hatóságok (beleértve a bíróságokat és a közigazgatási szerveket) előtt fedi fel, amelyek az Egyezmény hatálya alá tartozó adók kivetésével vagy beszedésével, azok érvényesítésével, illetve a velük kapcsolatos peres eljárással vagy a jogorvoslat elbírálásával foglalkoznak. Ezek a személyek vagy hatóságok a tájékoztatást csak ilyen célokra használhatják fel. A tájékoztatást nyilvános bírósági tárgyalásokon vagy bírósági határozatokban nyilvánosságra hozhatják. A kapott információt az információt nyújtó Szerződő Állam kívánságára titokban kell tartani.

2. Az 1. bekezdés rendelkezései semmilyen esetben sem értelmezhetők oly módon, mintha valamelyik Szerződő Államot köteleznék:

(1) az egyik vagy a másik Szerződő Állam jogszabályaitól vagy államigazgatási gyakorlatától eltérő államigazgatási intézkedések hozatalára;

(2) olyan információ átadására, amely az egyik vagy a másik Szerződő Állam jogszabályai szerint vagy a közigazgatás szokásos rendjében nem szerezhető be;

(3) olyan információ átadására, amely szakmai, üzleti, ipari, kereskedelmi vagy foglalkozási titkot, szakmai eljárást vagy olyan információt fedne fel, amely a közrendbe (ordre public) ütközne.

28. Cikk

Diplomáciai és konzuli képviseletek tagjai

Az Egyezmény semmilyen módon nem érinti a diplomáciai és konzuli képviseletek tagjait a nemzetközi jog általános szabályai vagy külön megállapodások rendelkezései alapján megillető adózási kiváltságokat.

29. Cikk

Hatálybalépés

1. Az Egyezményt meg kell erősíteni és a megerősítésről szóló okiratokat ki kell cserélni.

2. Az Egyezmény a megerősítésről szóló okiratok kicserélése napján lép életbe és rendelkezései hatályosak lesznek a megerősítésről szóló okmányok kicserélésének naptári évét követő naptári év január 1-jén vagy az után kezdődő minden pénzügyi évben származó jövedelem és tulajdonban levő vagyon adójára.

3. Attól a naptól, amikor ez az Egyezmény, a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság és a Magyar Köztársaság között a kölcsönös kapcsolatokban hatályos lesz „a Jugoszláv Szocialista Szövetségi Köztársaság és a Magyar Népköztársaság között a kettős adóztatás elkerülésére a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén” Budapesten, 1985. október 17. napján aláírt Egyezmény alkalmazása hatályát veszti.

30. Cikk

Felmondás

Ez az Egyezmény addig marad hatályban, ameddig a Szerződő Államok egyike azt fel nem mondja. Az Egyezményt bármelyik Szerződő Állam felmondhatja diplomáciai úton úgy, hogy a felmondásról értesítést ad legalább hat hónappal bármely naptári év vége előtt, az Egyezmény életbelépésének napjától számított ötödik év után. Ebben az esetben az Egyezmény hatályát veszti a felmondásról szóló értesítés adásának naptári évét követő naptári év január 1-jén vagy az után kezdődő minden pénzügyi évben származó jövedelem és tulajdonban lévő vagyon adójára.

Ennek hiteléül az arra kellő meghatalmazással rendelkező alulírottak az Egyezményt aláírták.

Készült Budapesten, 2001. június 20. napján, két eredeti példányban, angol nyelven, mind a két eredeti példány egyaránt hiteles.

 A Magyar Köztársaság nevében

 A Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság nevében”

3. § (1) Ez a törvény a kihirdetése napján lép hatályba, rendelkezéseit azonban 2003. január 1. napjától kell alkalmazni.

(2) A Magyar Népköztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szocialista Szövetségi Köztársaság között a kettős adóztatás elkerülésére a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén Budapesten, 1985. október 17. napján aláírt egyezmény kihirdetéséről szóló 1988. évi 6. törvényerejű rendelet a Magyar Köztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Köztársaság viszonylatában 2003. január 1. napján hatályát vesztette.

(3) Tekintettel a Magyar Kormány és a Macedón Kormány között a kettős adóztatás elkerüléséről és az adóztatás kijátszásának megakadályozásáról a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén Szkopjéban, 2001. április 13-án aláírt Egyezmény kihirdetéséről szóló 2002. évi XXXV. törvény rendelkezéseire, a Magyar Népköztársaság és a Jugoszláv Szocialista Szövetségi Köztársaság között a kettős adóztatás elkerülésére a jövedelem- és a vagyonadók területén Budapesten, 1985. október 17. napján aláírt egyezmény kihirdetéséről szóló 1988. évi 6. törvényerejű rendelet a Magyar Köztársaság és a Macedón Köztársaság viszonylatában 2003. január 1. napján hatályát vesztette.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásáról a pénzügyminiszter gondoskodik.