2002. évi LII. törvény

a Magyar Köztársaság és a Libanoni Köztársaság között a beruházások ösztönzéséről és kölcsönös védelméről Bejrútban, 2001. június 22-én aláírt Megállapodás kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés a Magyar Köztársaság és a Libanoni Köztársaság között 2001. június 22-én, Bejrútban aláírt, a beruházások ösztönzéséről és kölcsönös védelméről szóló Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti. (A Megállapodás megerősítéséről szóló jegyzékváltás 2002. július 23-án megtörtént és a Megállapodás 2002. július 23-án hatályba lépett.)

2. § A Megállapodás hiteles angol nyelvű szövege és annak magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„Agreement between the Republic of Hungary and the Republic of Lebanon for the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments

The Republic of Hungary and the Republic of Lebanon (hereinafter referred to as the „Contracting Parties”),

desiring to intensify economic cooperation to the mutual benefit of both Contracting Parties,

intending to create and maintain favourable conditions for investments of investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party, and

conscious that the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments, according to the present Agreement, stimulates the business initiatives in this field,

have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement:

1. The term „investment” shall comprise every kind of asset invested in connection with economic activities by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party in accordance with the laws and regulations of the latter and shall include, in particular, though not exclusively:

a) movable and immovable property as well as any other property rights in rem such as mortgages, liens, pledges and similar rights;

b) shares, stocks and debentures of companies or any other form of participation in a company;

c) claims to money or to any performance having an economic value associated with an investment;

d) intellectual and industrial property rights, including copyrights, trade marks, patents, industrial designs, technical processes, know-how, trade secrets, trade names and goodwill associated with an investment, as well as other similar rights recognized by the laws of the Contracting Parties; and

e) any right conferred by law or under contract and any licenses and permits pursuant to law, including the concessions to search for, extract, cultivate or exploit natural resources.

Any alteration of the form in which assets are invested shall not affect their character as investment on condition that this alteration is made in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party in the territory of which the investment has been made.

2. The term „investor” shall mean any natural or legal person who invests in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

a) The term „natural person” shall mean any natural person having the nationality of either Contracting Party in accordance with its laws.

b) The term „legal person” shall mean with respect to either Contracting Party, any entity incorporated or constituted in accordance with its laws, with or without legal personality, and considered as a company.

3. The term „returns” shall mean amounts yielded by an investment and in particular, though not exclusively, includes profits, interest, capital gains, dividends, royalties or fees, irrespective of the form in which the return is paid.

4. The term „territory” shall mean:

a) in the case of the Republic of Hungary, when used in a geographical sense, the territory of the Republic of Hungary;

b) in the case of the Republic of Lebanon when used in a geographical sense, the territory of the Republic of Lebanon.

5. The term „freely convertible currency” means the currency that is widely used to make payments for international transactions and widely exchanged in principal international exchange markets.

Article 2

Promotion and Protection of Investments

1. Each Contracting Party shall encourage and create favourable conditions for investors of the other Contracting Party to make investments in its territory and, shall admit such investments in accordance with its laws and regulations.

2. Investments and returns of investors of either Contracting Party shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment and shall enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party. Each Contracting Party shall refrain from impairing by unreasonable or discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, extension, sale or liquidation of such investments.

3. When a Contracting Party shall have admitted an investment on its territory, it shall, in accordance with its laws and regulations, grant the necessary permits in connection with such an investment, including authorizations for engaging top managerial and technical personnel of their choice, regardless of nationality.

Article 3

National and Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment

1. Each Contracting Party shall in its territory accord investments and returns of investors of the other Contracting Party treatment not less favourable than that which it accords to investments and returns of its own investors or to investments and returns of investors of any third State whichever is more favourable.

2. Each Contracting Party shall in its territory accord to investors of the other Contracting Party, as regards management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of their investment, treatment which is fair and equitable and not less favourable than that which it accords to its own investors or investors of any third State, whichever is more favourable.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 and 2 of this Article shall not be construed so as to oblige one Contracting Party to extend to the investors of the other Contracting Party the benefit of any treatment, preference or privilege which may be extended by the former Contracting Party by virtue of:

a) any existing or future customs, economic or monetary union or free trade area or similar international agreements leading to such unions or institutions or other forms of regional cooperation to which either of the Contracting Parties is or may become a party;

b) any international agreement or arrangement relating wholly or mainly to taxation or any domestic legislation relating wholly or mainly to taxation;

c) any multilateral agreements on investments to which either of the Contracting Party is or may become a party.

Article 4

Compensation for Losses

1. When investments by investors of either Contracting Party suffer losses owing to war, armed conflict, a state of national emergency, revolt, insurrection, riot or other similar events in the territory of the other Contracting Party, they shall be accorded by the latter Contracting Party treatment, as regards restitution, indemnification, compensation or other settlement, not less favourable than that which the latter Contracting Party accords to its own investors or to investors of any third State whichever is more favourable.

2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1 of this Article, investors of one Contracting Party who in any of the events referred to in that paragraph suffer losses in the territory of the other Contracting Party resulting from:

a) requisitioning of their property by its forces or authorities,

b) destruction of their property by its forces or authorities which was not caused in combat action or was not required by the necessity of the situation

shall be accorded by the other Contracting Party just and adequate compensation for the losses sustained during the period of the requisitioning or as a result of the destruction of the property.

Compensation shall include interest at a market rate until the day of payment.

3. Resulting payments under this Article shall be freely transferable in a freely convertible currency without delay.

Article 5

Expropriation

1. Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be nationalised, expropriated or subjected to measures having effect equivalent to nationalisation or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as „expropriation”) in the territory of the other Contracting Party except for a public purpose as established by law. The expropriation shall be carried out under due process of law, on a non-discriminatory basis and shall be accompanied by provisions for the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Such compensation shall amount to the market value of the investment expropriated immediately before expropriation or impending expropriation became public knowledge, shall include interest at market rate from the date of expropriation to the date of payment and shall be made without delay, be effectively realizable and be freely transferable in a freely convertible currency.

2. The investor affected shall have a right, to prompt review, by a judicial or other independent authority of the Contracting Party making the expropriation, of his or its case and of the valuation of his or its investment in accordance with the principles set out in this Article.

3. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall also apply where a Contracting Party expropriates the assets of a company which is incorporated or constituted under the law in force in any part of its own territory, and in which investors of the other Contracting Party own shares. The compensation is due to the company and may be paid in local currency as well.

4. The provisions of this Article shall also apply to the returns from an investment.

Article 6

Transfers

1. The Contracting Parties shall permit the free transfer of payments related to investments and returns. The transfers shall be made in a freely convertible currency, without any restriction and undue delay. Such transfers shall include in particular, though not exclusively:

a) capital and additional amounts to maintain or increase the investment;

b) profits, interest, dividends and other current income;

c) funds in repayment of loans;

d) royalties or fees;

e) proceeds of the total or partial sale or liquidation of the investment;

f) the wages or other similar earnings of natural persons engaged from abroad in connection with an investment subject to the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party, in which investments have been made;

g) payment of compensation under Articles 4 and 5 of this Agreement; and

h) payments arising out of settlement of a dispute.

2. For the purpose of this Agreement, exchange rates shall be the published rates of the commercial Banks effective for the current transactions at the date of transfer, unless otherwise agreed.

Article 7

Subrogation

1. If a Contracting Party or its designated agency makes payment to its own investors under a guarantee it has accorded in respect of an investment in the territory of the other Contracting Party, the latter Contracting Party shall recognize:

a) the assignment, whether under the law or pursuant to a legal transaction in that country, of any right or claim by the investor to the former Contracting Party or its designated agency, as well as,

b) that the former Contracting Party or its designated agency is entitled by virtue of subrogation to exercise the rights and enforce the claims of that investor and shall assume the obligations related to the investment.

2. The subrogated rights or claims shall not exceed the original rights or claims of the investor.

Article 8

Settlement of Investment Disputes between a Contracting Party and an Investor of the other Contracting Party

1. Any dispute which may arise between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party in connection with an investment on the territory of that other Contracting Party shall be subject to negotiations between the parties in dispute.

2. If any dispute between an investor of one Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party can not be thus settled within a period of six months following the date on which such negotiations were requested in written notification, the investor shall be entitled to submit the case either to:

a) the competent court of the Contracting Party in the territory of which the investment has been made; or

b) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) having regard to the applicable provisions of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States opened for signature at Washington D.C. on 18 March 1965, in the event both Contracting Parties shall have become a party to this Convention; or

the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes under the Rules Governing the Additional Facility for the Administration of Proceedings by the Secretariat of the Centre (Additional Facility of Rules), if one of the Contracting Parties is not a Contracting State of the ICSID Convention; or

c) an arbitrator or international ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). The parties to the dispute may agree in writing to modify these Rules.

The choice made as per subparagraphs b) and c) herein above is final.

3. The arbitral awards shall be final and binding on both Parties to the dispute and enforced without delay in accordance with the domestic laws of the Contracting Party concerned.

Article 9

Settlement of Disputes between the Contracting Parties

1. Disputes between the Contracting Parties concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall, if possible, be settled through consultation or negotiation.

2. If the dispute cannot be thus settled within six months, it shall upon the request of either Contracting Party, be submitted to an Arbitral Tribunal of three members, in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

3. The Arbitral Tribunal shall be constituted for each individual case in the following way. Within two months from the date of the receipt of the request for arbitration, each Contracting Party shall appoint one member of the Tribunal. These two members shall then select a national of a third State who shall be appointed Chairman of the Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the „Chairman”). The Chairman shall be appointed within three months from the date of appointment of the other two members.

4. If within the periods specified in paragraph 3 of this Article the necessary appointments have not been made, a request may be made to the President of the International Court of Justice to make the appointments. If he happens to be a national of either Contracting Party, or if he is otherwise prevented from discharging the said function, the Vice-President shall be invited to make the appointments. If the Vice President also happens to be a national of either Contracting Party or is prevented from discharging the said function, the member of the International Court of Justice next in seniority who is not a national of either Contracting Party shall be invited to make the appointments.

5. The Arbitral Tribunal shall reach its decision by a majority of votes.

6. The Tribunal shall issue its decision on the basis of respect for the law, the provisions of this Agreement, as well as of the universally accepted principles of international law.

7. Subject to other provisions made by the Contracting Parties, the Tribunal shall determine its procedure.

8. Each Contracting Party shall bear the cost of its own arbitrator and its representation in the arbitral proceedings; the cost of the Chairman and the remaining costs shall be borne in equal parts by both Contracting Parties. The Arbitral Tribunal may make a different regulation concerning the costs.

9. The decisions of the Tribunal are final and binding for each Contracting Parties.

Article 10

Application of Other Rules and Special Commitments

1. Where a matter is governed simultaneously both by this Agreement and by another international agreement to which both Contracting Parties are parties, nothing in this Agreement shall prevent either Contracting Party or any of its investors who own investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party from taking advantage of whichever rules are more favourable to his case.

2. If the treatment to be accorded by one Contracting Party to investors of the other Contracting Party in accordance with its laws and regulations or other specific provisions of contracts is more favourable than that accorded by the Agreement, the more favourable shall be accorded.

Article 11

Applicability of this Agreement

This Agreement shall apply to investments made in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties in accordance with its laws and regulations by investors of the other Contracting Party prior to as well as after the entry into force of this Agreement, but shall not apply to any dispute or claim concerning an investment which arose, or which was settled before its entry into force.

Article 12

Entry into Force, Duration and Termination

1. The Contracting Parties shall notify each other that their constitutional requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been complied with. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the second notification.

2. This Agreement shall remain in force for a period of ten years and shall continue in force thereafter unless, one year before the expiry of the initial or any subsequent periods of ten years, either Contracting Party notifies the other in writing of its intention to terminate the Agreement.

3. In respect of investments made prior to the termination of this Agreement, the provisions of this Agreement shall continue to be effective for a period of ten years from the date of termination.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned duly authorized have signed this Agreement.

DONE in duplicate at Beirut, this 22 day of June, 2001, in English.

 For the Republic of Hungary

 For the Republic of Lebanon

Protocol

On the signing of the Agreement between the Republic of Hungary and the Republic of Lebanon, the undersigned have, in addition, agreed on the following provision, which should be regarded as an integral part of this Agreement:

With reference to Article 3:

Concerning ownership of real estate and other real rights, the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not be construed so as to oblige either Contracting Party to extend to the investors and investments of the other Contracting Party the treatment granted to its own investors.

DONE in duplicate at Beirut, this 22 day of June, 2001, in English.

 For the Republic of Hungary

 For the Republic of Lebanon

Megállapodás a Magyar Köztársaság és a Libanoni Köztársaság között a beruházások ösztönzéséről és kölcsönös védelméről

A Magyar Köztársaság és a Libanoni Köztársaság (a továbbiakban: Szerződő Felek),

attól az óhajtól vezetve, hogy a gazdasági együttműködést mindkét Szerződő Fél javára erősítsék,

azzal a szándékkal, hogy kedvező feltételeket teremtsenek és tartsanak fenn az egyik Szerződő Fél beruházóinak beruházásaihoz a másik Szerződő Fél területén, és

annak tudatában, hogy a beruházásoknak a jelen Megállapodással összhangban történő előmozdítása és kölcsönös védelme ösztönzi az üzleti kezdeményezéseket ezen a területen,

megállapodtak a következőkben:

1. Cikk

Meghatározások

A Megállapodás alkalmazásában:

1. A „beruházás” kifejezés magában foglal mindenfajta olyan vagyoni értéket, melyet az egyik Szerződő Fél valamely beruházója gazdasági tevékenységgel összefüggően fektetett be a másik Szerződő Fél területén ez utóbbi törvényeivel és más jogszabályaival összhangban, és különösen - de nem kizárólag - a következőket jelenti:

a) az ingó és ingatlan tulajdont, valamint minden egyéb dologi jogot, mint például a jelzálogot, a zálogjogot, egyéb zálogot és hasonló jogokat;

b) a részvényeket, üzletrészeket és vállalati kötvényeket, illetve a társasági érdekeltség egyéb formáit;

c) olyan pénzköveteléseket vagy gazdasági értékkel bíró teljesítés nyújtására vonatkozó követeléseket, amelyek beruházáshoz kapcsolódnak;

d) a szellemi és ipari tulajdonhoz fűződő jogokat, ideértve a beruházáshoz kapcsolódó szerzői jogokat, védjegyeket, szabadalmakat, ipari mintákat, technológiákat, know-how-t, kereskedelmi titkokat, kereskedelmi neveket és goodwill-t éppúgy, mint a Szerződő Felek törvényei által elismert egyéb hasonló jogokat; és

e) minden jogszabály vagy szerződés által biztosított jogot és jogszabályon alapuló mindenfajta engedélyt és jóváhagyást, beleértve a természeti erőforrások kutatására, kitermelésére, művelésére vagy kiaknázására vonatkozó koncessziókat.

A vagyoni érték beruházási formájának későbbi megváltozása nem érinti annak beruházás jellegét, feltételezve, hogy ez a változás annak a Szerződő Félnek a törvényeivel és más jogszabályaival összhangban áll, amelynek területén a beruházást eszközölték.

2. A „beruházó” kifejezés minden olyan természetes vagy jogi személyt jelent, aki a másik Szerződő Fél területén beruházást eszközöl.

a) A „természetes személy” kifejezés minden olyan természetes személyt jelent, aki bármelyik Szerződő Fél állampolgára annak jogszabályai értelmében.

b) A „jogi személy” kifejezés jelenti bármely Szerződő Fél tekintetében azt a jogi személyiséggel rendelkező vagy nem rendelkező jogalanyt, amely törvényeivel összhangban jött létre, illetve került bejegyzésre, és társaságnak tekintendő.

3. A „hozam” kifejezés a beruházásból származó eredményt jelenti és magában foglalja - különösen, de nem kizárólagosan - a nyereséget, kamatot, tőkenyereséget, osztalékot, jogdíjakat vagy egyéb díjakat, tekintet nélkül arra, hogy milyen formában kerül kifizetésre.

4. A „terület” kifejezés jelenti:

a) a Magyar Köztársaság tekintetében, földrajzi értelemben használva, a Magyar Köztársaság területét;

b) a Libanoni Köztársaság tekintetében, földrajzi értelemben használva, a Libanoni Köztársaság területét.

5. A „szabadon átváltható pénznem” kifejezés azt a pénznemet jelenti, amelyet széles körben használnak fizetésre nemzetközi üzleti tranzakciók esetében és széles körben forgalmaznak a vezető nemzetközi devizapiacokon.

2. Cikk

A beruházások ösztönzése és védelme

1. Mindkét Szerződő Fél ösztönzi a másik Szerződő Fél beruházóit, és kedvező körülményeket teremt számukra annak érdekében, hogy területén beruházásokat eszközöljenek, továbbá törvényeivel és más jogszabályaival összhangban lehetővé teszi az ilyen beruházások létrehozását.

2. Bármelyik Szerződő Fél beruházói által eszközölt beruházások és azok hozamai a másik Szerződő Fél területén mindenkor igazságos és méltányos bánásmódban részesülnek, továbbá teljes körű védelmet és biztonságot élveznek. Mindkét Szerződő Fél tartózkodik attól, hogy indokolatlan és megkülönböztető intézkedésekkel hátráltassa az ilyen beruházások irányítását, fenntartását, használatát, élvezetét, bővítését, eladását vagy felszámolását.

3. Amennyiben a Szerződő Fél lehetővé tette egy beruházás létrehozását a területén, törvényeivel és más jogszabályaival összhangban biztosítja a beruházással kapcsolatban szükséges engedélyeket, beleértve a kiválasztott felső vezetés és a technikai személyzet alkalmazásához szükséges engedélyeket, azok nemzetiségére való tekintet nélkül.

3. Cikk

Nemzeti és legnagyobb kedvezményes elbánás

1. Mindkét Szerződő Fél a területén a másik Szerződő Fél beruházóinak a beruházásait és hozamait olyan bánásmódban részesíti, amely nem kedvezőtlenebb, mint a saját beruházói beruházásainak és hozamainak, illetve bármely harmadik állam beruházói beruházásainak és hozamainak biztosított bánásmód közül a kedvezőbb.

2. Mindkét Szerződő Fél a területén a másik Szerződő Fél beruházóit olyan bánásmódban részesíti a beruházásaik irányítása, fenntartása, használata, élvezete vagy a velük való rendelkezés tekintetében, amely igazságos és méltányos és nem kedvezőtlenebb, mint a saját beruházói vagy bármelyik harmadik állam beruházói számára biztosított bánásmód közül a kedvezőbb.

3. E cikk 1. és 2. bekezdésének rendelkezései nem értelmezhetők úgy, hogy az egyik Szerződő Felet arra kötelezik, hogy kiterjessze a másik Szerződő Fél beruházóira bármilyen olyan bánásmódnak, preferenciának vagy kiváltságnak az előnyeit, amelyet az előbbi Szerződő Fél a következők alapján nyújthat:

a) hogy tagja vagy tagjává válik valamely létező vagy jövőbeli vám-, gazdasági vagy pénzügyi uniónak, szabadkereskedelmi övezetnek, vagy részese vagy részesévé válik az ilyen uniók, intézmények létrehozásához vezető hasonló nemzetközi megállapodásnak, vagy a regionális együttműködés más formáinak;

b) bármely nemzetközi megállapodás vagy megegyezés, amely egészben vagy nagyrészt az adózással kapcsolatos vagy bármely belföldi, egészben vagy nagyrészt adózásra vonatkozó szabályozás;

c) hogy tagja vagy tagjává válik valamely többoldalú nemzetközi beruházásvédelmi megállapodásnak.

4. Cikk

Kártalanítás veszteségekért

1. Ha bármelyik Szerződő Fél beruházóinak a beruházásai háború, fegyveres összeütközés, országos szükségállapot, felkelés, lázadás, zavargás vagy egyéb hasonló esemény miatt a másik Állam területén veszteséget szenvednek, az utóbbi Szerződő Fél a helyreállítás, kártalanítás, kárpótlás vagy egyéb rendezés tekintetében olyan bánásmódban részesíti azokat, amely nem kedvezőtlenebb annál, mint az utóbbi Állam által a saját beruházóinak vagy bármelyik harmadik állam beruházóinak biztosított bánásmód közül a kedvezőbb.

2. Nem érintve a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében foglaltakat, az egyik Szerződő Fél azon beruházói számára, akik a hivatkozott bekezdésben foglalt események kapcsán a másik Szerződő Fél területén veszteségeket szenvednek abból kifolyólag, hogy

a) tulajdonukat a másik Szerződő Fél erői, illetve hatóságai igénybe vették,

b) tulajdonukat a másik Szerződő Fél erői, illetve hatóságai megsemmisítették, és erre nem harci cselekmények folytán vagy a helyzet szükségszerűsége miatt került sor,

a másik Szerződő Félnek igazságos és megfelelő kártalanítást kell nyújtania az igénybevétel időszaka alatt elszenvedett vagy a tulajdon megsemmisülése következtében előállt veszteségeikért.

A kártalanításnak tartalmaznia kell piaci kamatot a kifizetés napjáig.

3. Az e cikk alapján felmerülő kifizetéseket szabadon átváltható pénznemben szabadon és késedelem nélkül kell átutalni.

5. Cikk

Kisajátítás

1. Egyik Szerződő Fél beruházóinak beruházásait sem államosíthatják, sajátíthatják ki vagy vethetik olyan intézkedések alá a másik Szerződő Fél területén, melyek hatása megegyezik az államosítással vagy kisajátítással (a továbbiakban: kisajátítás), kivéve a törvényben meghatározott közérdeket. A kisajátítást hátrányos megkülönböztetésektől mentesen, megfelelő törvényes eljárás keretében kell végrehajtani, és egyidejűleg rendelkezni kell az azonnali, megfelelő és tényleges kártalanítás megfizetéséről. A kártalanításnak egyenértékűnek kell lennie a beruházásnak a kisajátítást, illetve a közelgő kisajátítás közismertté válását közvetlenül megelőző időpontban érvényes piaci értékével, a kisajátítás napjától kezdődően a fizetés napjáig terjedő időszakra vonatkozóan piaci kamatokat is kell tartalmaznia, késedelem nélkül teljesítendőnek, továbbá ténylegesen hozzáférhetőnek és szabadon átváltható pénznemben szabadon átutalhatónak kell lennie.

2. Az érintett beruházónak joga van a kisajátító Szerződő Fél bírói vagy egyéb független hatósága által az ügyét, és beruházásának az e cikkben rögzített elvekkel összhangban történő értékelését azonnal felülvizsgáltatni.

3. A jelen cikk 1. bekezdésének rendelkezései megfelelően alkalmazandók, amikor valamelyik Szerződő Fél egy olyan társaság vagyonát sajátítja ki, amely ezen Állam területének bármely részén az érvényes jogszabályok alapján jött létre, illetve került bejegyzésre és amelyben a másik Szerződő Fél beruházói üzletrészekkel bírnak. A kártalanítás a társaságnak fizetendő és helyi pénznemben is kifizethető.

4. Ezen cikk rendelkezései a beruházás hozamaira is vonatkoznak.

6. Cikk

Átutalások

1. A Szerződő Felek lehetővé teszik a beruházásokkal és hozamokkal kapcsolatos kifizetések szabad átutalhatóságát. Az átutalásoknak szabadon átváltható pénznemben kell történniük, bármely korlátozás és indokolatlan késedelem nélkül. Az ilyen átutalások különösen - de nem kizárólag - a következőket foglalják magukban:

a) a tőkét és a beruházás fenntartására vagy növelésére fordított pótlólagos összegeket;

b) a nyereséget, kamatot, osztalékot és az egyéb folyó bevételt;

c) a hitelek visszafizetésére szolgáló összegeket;

d) a jogdíjakat és egyéb díjakat;

e) a beruházás részleges vagy teljes eladásából vagy felszámolásából befolyó összegeket;

f) a beruházáshoz kapcsolódóan külföldről alkalmazott természetes személyeknek azt a bérét vagy egyéb keresetét, amely azon Szerződő Fél törvényeinek és más jogszabályainak hatálya alá tartozik, ahol a beruházást létrehozták;

g) a Megállapodás 4. és 5. Cikkeinek megfelelően kifizetett kártérítést; és

h) a vitarendezésből származó kifizetéseket.

2. A jelen Megállapodás tekintetében árfolyamoknak - eltérő megegyezés hiányában - az átutalás időpontjában, az adott tranzakcióra érvényes, a kereskedelmi bankok által közzétett hivatalos árfolyamok tekintendők.

7. Cikk

Jogátruházás

1. Amennyiben az egyik Szerződő Fél vagy annak kijelölt ügynöksége a másik Szerződő Fél területén megvalósult beruházására vonatkozóan nyújtott garancia alapján saját beruházóinak kifizetést teljesít, az utóbbi Szerződő Fél elismeri:

a) a beruházó bármilyen jogának vagy követelésének átszállását az előbbi Szerződő Félre vagy annak kijelölt ügynökségére az annak országában érvényes valamely jogszabály vagy jogügylet útján, valamint,

b) hogy az előbbi Szerződő Fél vagy annak kijelölt ügynöksége a jogutódlás címén jogosult a beruházó jogainak gyakorlására és követeléseinek érvényesítésére, és átvállalja a beruházással kapcsolatos kötelezettségeket.

2. Az átruházott jogok és követelések nem haladhatják meg a beruházó eredeti jogait és követeléseit.

8. Cikk

Az egyik Szerződő Fél és a másik Szerződő Fél beruházója közötti beruházási viták rendezése

1. Az egyik Szerződő Fél beruházója és a másik Szerződő Fél közötti, az utóbbi Szerződő Fél területén lévő beruházással kapcsolatos vitákat a vitában álló feleknek tárgyalások útján kell egymás közt rendezniük.

2. Ha az egyik Szerződő Fél beruházója és a másik Szerződő Fél közötti vita az ilyen tárgyalásokra vonatkozó igény írásbeli benyújtása utáni hat hónapon belül nem rendezhető ily módon, az érintett beruházónak jogában áll az ügyet beterjeszteni:

a) annak a Szerződő Félnek az illetékes bíróságához, amelyben a beruházás megvalósult; vagy

b) az Államok és más államok természetes és jogi személyei közötti beruházási viták rendezéséről szóló, Washingtonban, 1965. március 18-án kelt Egyezmény vonatkozó rendelkezései szerint a Beruházási Viták Rendezésének Nemzetközi Központjához (ICSID), amennyiben mindkét Állam részesévé vált az Egyezménynek; vagy

a Központ Titkárságának Eljárási Igazgatására Vonatkozó Kiegészítő Lehetőségek Szabályai (Kiegészítő Lehetőségek Szabályai) szerint a Beruházási Viták Rendezésének Nemzetközi Központjához (ICSID), amennyiben az egyik Szerződő Fél nem tartozik az ICSID Egyezmény Szerződő Államai közé; vagy

c) olyan nemzetközi választott bíróhoz, illetve olyan nemzetközi ad hoc választottbírósághoz, amely az Egyesült Nemzetek Nemzetközi Kereskedelmi Jogi Bizottságának (UNCITRAL) Választott Bírósági Szabályai szerint jött létre. A vitában lévő felek írásban megállapodhatnak ezen Szabályok módosításában.

A b), illetve c) pontok szerinti választás véglegesnek tekintendő.

3. A döntés végleges és kötelező érvényű a vitában részt vevő mindkét fél számára és az érintett Szerződő Félnek a jogszabályaival összhangban, késedelem nélkül kell végrehajtani.

9. Cikk

A Szerződő Felek közötti viták rendezése

1. A Szerződő Felek között jelen Megállapodás értelmezésével vagy alkalmazásával kapcsolatosan felmerült vitákat lehetőség szerint konzultációk, illetve tárgyalások útján kell rendezni.

2. Ha a vita ily módon hat hónapon belül nem rendezhető, azt bármelyik Szerződő Fél kérésére a jelen cikk rendelkezései szerinti, háromtagú választottbíróság elé kell terjeszteni.

3. A választottbíróságot minden egyes esetben a következő módon kell megalakítani. A választottbírósági eljárás iránti kérelem kézhezvételétől számított két hónapon belül mindkét Szerződő Fél kijelöli a bíróság egy-egy tagját. Ezen két tagnak azután egy harmadik állam állampolgárát kell kiválasztania, akit a bíróság elnökévé (a továbbiakban: elnök) kell kijelölni. A bíróság elnökét a két másik tag kijelölésének időpontjától számított három hónapon belül ki kell jelölni.

4. Amennyiben a jelen cikk 3. bekezdésében meghatározott határidőkön belül a szükséges kijelölések nem történtek meg, úgy a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnökét lehet felkérni a kijelölések megtételére. Ha a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnöke valamelyik Szerződő Fél állampolgára, vagy valamilyen más ok akadályozza az említett tisztség ellátásában, az alelnököt kell felkérni a szükséges kijelölések megtételére. Ha az alelnök valamelyik Szerződő Fél állampolgára, vagy ő is akadályoztatva van az említett tisztség ellátásában, a Nemzetközi Bíróságnak azt a rangidős tagját kell felkérni a kijelölések megtételére, aki egyik Szerződő Félnek sem állampolgára.

5. A választottbíróság döntését szavazattöbbséggel hozza.

6. A választottbíróság döntését a törvények, ezen Megállapodás rendelkezései, valamint a nemzetközi jog általánosan elfogadott elvei és szabályai alapján hozza.

7. A Szerződő Felek egyéb rendelkezéseit figyelembe véve a bíróság eljárási szabályait maga határozza meg.

8. Mindkét Szerződő Fél maga viseli az általa választott bírónak, valamint a bírósági eljárásban való képviseletének a költségeit. Az elnök költségeit és a fennmaradó költségeket a Szerződő Felek egyenlő arányban viselik. A bíróság eltérő rendelkezést is hozhat a költségek tekintetében.

9. A bíróság döntései véglegesek és kötelezőek mindkét Szerződő Fél számára.

10. Cikk

Egyéb szabályok és különleges kötelezettségek alkalmazása

1. Amennyiben valamely ügyre egyaránt vonatkoznak a jelen Megállapodás és valamely olyan más nemzetközi egyezmény rendelkezései, melynek mindkét Szerződő Fél részese, úgy ezen Megállapodás rendelkezései nem akadályozhatják meg sem a Szerződő Feleket, sem a másik Szerződő Fél területén beruházással bíró beruházóikat abban, hogy az ügyükre nézve kedvezőbb szabályozás előnyeit élvezzék.

2. Amennyiben az egyik Szerződő Fél törvényei és más jogszabályai, vagy más szerződéseinek különleges rendelkezései a másik Szerződő Fél beruházói számára kedvezőbb bánásmódot biztosítanak, mint a jelen Megállapodás, úgy a kedvezőbbet kell alkalmazni.

11. Cikk

A Megállapodás alkalmazhatósága

A Megállapodást az egyik Szerződő Fél területén, annak törvényeivel és más jogszabályaival összhangban a másik Szerződő Fél beruházói által a Megállapodás hatálybalépése előtt vagy azt követően megvalósított beruházásokra kell alkalmazni, de nem alkalmazható olyan beruházással kapcsolatos jogvitára vagy követelésre, amely a hatálybalépése előtt merült fel, vagy amelyet a hatálybalépés előtt rendeztek.

12. Cikk

Hatálybalépés, időbeli hatály és felmondás

1. A Szerződő Felek tájékoztatják egymást arról, hogy a jelen Megállapodás hatálybalépéséhez szükséges alkotmányos követelményeiknek eleget tettek. A jelen Megállapodás a második értesítés keltének napján lép hatályba.

2. A jelen Megállapodás tízéves időtartamra marad hatályban, és azt követően is mindaddig hatályban marad, amíg az egyik Szerződő Fél az eredeti vagy bármelyik későbbi tízéves időtartam lejárta előtt egy évvel írásban nem tájékoztatja a másikat arról a szándékáról, hogy fel kívánja mondani a Megállapodást.

3. A jelen Megállapodás felmondása előtti időszakban megvalósított beruházások tekintetében a Megállapodás rendelkezései a felmondást követő további tíz évig érvényben maradnak.

Ennek hiteléül az arra kellő felhatalmazással rendelkező alulírottak a Megállapodást aláírták.

Készült két eredeti példányban, Bejrútban, 2001. június hó 22. napján, angol nyelven.

 A Magyar Köztársaság nevében

 A Libanoni Köztársaság nevében

Jegyzőkönyv

A Magyar Köztársaság és a Libanoni Köztársaság között létrejött Megállapodás aláírásakor az alulírottak ezenkívül a következő rendelkezésről állapodtak meg, amely ezen Megállapodás elválaszthatatlan részét képezi:

A 3. Cikkhez:

Ingatlan tulajdonjogok és egyéb dologi jogok tekintetében ezen cikk 1. bekezdésének rendelkezései nem értelmezhetők úgy, hogy az egyik Szerződő Felet arra kötelezik, hogy kiterjessze a másik Szerződő Fél beruházóira és beruházásaira azt a bánásmódot, amelyet saját beruházóinak nyújt.

Készült két eredeti példányban, Bejrútban, 2001. június hó 22. napján, angol nyelven.

 A Magyar Köztársaság nevében

 A Libanoni Köztársaság nevében”

3. § Ez a törvény a kihirdetése napján lép hatályba, a Megállapodás rendelkezéseit azonban 2002. július 23-tól kell alkalmazni.