2002. évi VI. törvény

az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt Egyezménye: Az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról szóló Egyezmény, valamint az Egyezménynek az emberi lény klónozásának tilalmáról szóló, Párizsban, 1998. január 12-én kelt Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyve kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt Egyezménye: Az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról szóló Egyezményt (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény), valamint az Egyezménynek az emberi lény klónozásának tilalmáról szóló, Párizsban, 1998. január 12-én kelt Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvét (a továbbiakban: Jegyzőkönyv) e törvénnyel hirdeti ki. (A megerősítésről szóló okirat letétbe helyezése 2002. január 9-én megtörtént.)

2. § Az Egyezmény angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine

Preamble

The Member States of the Council of Europe, the other States and the European Community signatories hereto,

bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaimed by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1948,

bearing in mind the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of 4 November 1950,

bearing in mind the European Social Charter of 18 October 1961,

bearing in mind the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 16 December 1966,

bearing in mind the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data of 28 January 1981,

bearing also in mind the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989,

considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is the achievement of a greater unity between its members and that one of the methods by which that aim is to be pursued is the maintenance and further realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms,

conscious of the accelerating developments in biology and medicine,

convinced of the need to respect the human being both as an individual and as a member of the human species and recognising the importance of ensuring the dignity of the human being,

conscious that the misuse of biology and medicine may lead to acts endangering human dignity,

affirming that progress in biology and medicine should be used for the benefit of present and future generations,

stressing the need for international co-operation so that all humanity may enjoy the benefits of biology and medicine,

recognising the importance of promoting a public debate on the questions posed by the application of biology and medicine and the responses to be given thereto,

wishing to remind ail members of society of their rights and responsibilities,

taking account of the work of the Parliamentary Assembly in this field, including Recommendation 1160 (1991) on the preparation of a Convention on bio-ethics,

resolving to take such measures as are necessary to safeguard human dignity and the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual with regard to the application of biology and medicine

have agreed as follows:

Chapter I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

Purpose and object

Parties to this Convention shall protect the dignity and identity of all human beings and guarantee everyone, without discrimination, respect for their integrity and other rights and fundamental freedoms with regard to the application of biology and medicine.

Each Party shall take in its internal law the necessary measures to give effect to the provisions of this Convention.

Article 2

Primacy of the human being

The interests and welfare of the human being shall prevail over the sole interest of society or science.

Article 3

Equitable access to health care

Parties, taking into account health needs and available resources, shall take appropriate measures with a view to providing, within their jurisdiction, equitable access to health care of appropriate quality.

Article 4

Professional standards

Any intervention in the health field, including research, must be carried out in accordance with relevant professional obligations and standards.

Chapter II

CONSENT

Article 5

General rule

An intervention in the health field may only be carried out after the person concerned has given free and informed consent to it.

This person shall beforehand be given appropriate information as to the purpose and nature of the intervention as well as on is consequences and risks.

The person concerned may freely withdraw consent at any time.

Article 6

Protection of persons not able to consent

1. Subject to Articles 17 and 20 below, an intervention may only be carried out on a person who does not have the capacity to consent, for his or her direct benefit.

2. Where, according to law, a minor does not have the capacity to consent to an intervention, the intervention may only be carried out with the authorisation of his or her representative or an authority or a person or body provided for by law.

The opinion of the minor shall be taken into consideration as an increasingly determining factor in proportion to his or her age and degree of maturity.

3. Where, according to law, an adult does not have the capacity to consent to an intervention because of a mental disability, a disease or for similar reasons, the intervention may only be carried out with the authorisation of his or her representative or an authority or a person or body provided for by law.

The individual concerned shall as far as possible take part in the authorisation procedure.

4. The representative, the authority, the person or the body mentioned in paragraphs 2. and 3. above shall be given, under the same conditions, the information referred to in Article 5.

5. The authorisation referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 above may be withdrawn at any time in the best interests of the person concerned.

Article 7

Protection of persons who have mental disorder

Subject to protective conditions prescribed by law, including supervisory, control and appeal procedures, a person who has a mental disorder of a serious nature may be subjected, without his or her consent, to an intervention aimed at treating his or her mental disorder only where, without such treatment, serious harm is likely to result to his or her health.

Article 8

Emergency situation

When because of an emergency situation the appropriate consent cannot be obtained, any medically necessary intervention may be carried out immediately for the benefit of the health of the individual concerned.

Article 9

Previously expressed wishes

The previously expressed wishes relating to a medical intervention by a patient who is not, at the time of the intervention, in a state to express his or her wishes shall be taken into account.

Chapter III

PRIVATE LIFE AND RIGHT TO INFORMATION

Article 10

Private life and right to information

1. Everyone has the right to respect for private life in relation to information about his or her health.

2. Everyone is entitled to know any information collected about his or her health. However, the wishes of individuals not to be so informed shall be observed.

3. In exceptional cases, restrictions may be placed by law on the exercise of the rights contained in paragraph 2 in the interests of the patient.

Chapter IV

HUMAN GENOME

Article 11

Non-discrimination

Any form of discrimination against a person on grounds of his or her genetic heritage is prohibited.

Article 12

Predictive genetic tests

Tests which are predictive of genetic diseases or which serve either to identify the subject as a carrier of a gene responsible for a disease or to detect a genetic predisposition or susceptibility to a disease may be performed only for health purposes or for scientific research linked to health purposes, and subject to appropriate genetic counselling.

Article 13

Interventions on the human genome

An intervention seeking to modify the human genome may only be undertaken for preventive, diagnostic or therapeutic purposes and only if its aim is not to introduce any modification in the genome of any descendants.

Article 14

Non-selection of sex

The use of techniques of medically assisted procreation shall not be allowed for the purpose of choosing a future child’s sex, except where serious hereditary sex-related disease is to be avoided.

Chapter V

SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Article 15

General rule

Scientific research in the field of biology and medicine shall be carried out freely, subject to the provisions of this Convention and the other legal provisions ensuring the protection of the human being.

Article 16

Protection of persons undergoing research

Research on a person may only be undertaken if all the following conditions are met:

(i) there is no alternative of comparable effectiveness to research on humans,

(ii) the risks which may be incurred by that person are not disproportionate to the potential benefits of the research,

(iii) the research project has been approved by the competent body after independent examination of its scientific merit, including assessment of the importance of the aim of the research, and multidisciplinary review of its ethical acceptability,

(iv) the persons undergoing research have been informed of their rights and the safeguards prescribed by law for their protection,

(v) the necessary consent as provided for under Article 5 has been given expressly, specifically and is documented. Such consent may be freely withdrawn at any time.

Article 17

Protection of persons not able to consent to research

1. Research on a person without the capacity to consent as stipulated in Article 5 may be undertaken only if all the following conditions are met:

(i) the conditions laid down in Article 16, sub-paragraphs (i) to (iv), are fulfilled;

(ii) the results of the research have the potential to produce real and direct benefit to his or her health;

(iii) research of comparable effectiveness cannot be carried out on individuals capable of giving consent;

(iv) the necessary authorisation provided for under Article 6 has been given specifically and in writing; and

(v) the person concerned does not object.

2. Exceptionally and under the protective conditions prescribed by law, where the research has not the potential to produce results of direct benefit to the health of the person concerned, such research may be authorised subject to the conditions laid down in paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs (i), (iii), (iv) and (v) above, and to the following additional conditions

(i) the research has the aim of contributing, through significant improvement in the scientific understanding of the individual’s condition, disease or disorder, to the ultimate attainment of results capable of conferring benefit to the person concerned or to other persons in the same age category or afflicted with the same disease or disorder or having the same condition,

(ii) the research entails only minimal risk and minimal burden for the individual concerned.

Article 18

Research on embryos in vitro

1. Where the lave allows research on embryos in vitro, it shall ensure adequate protection of the embryo.

2. The creation of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited.

Chapter VI

ORGAN AND TISSUE REMOVAL FROM LIVING DONORS FOR TRANSPLANTATION PURPOSES

Article 19

General rule

1. Removal of organs or tissue from a living person for transplantation purposes may be carried out solely for the therapeutic benefit of the recipient and where there is no suitable organ or tissue available from a deceased person and no other alternative therapeutic method of comparable effectiveness.

2. The necessary consent as provided for under Article 5 must have been given expressly and specifically either in written form or before an official body.

Article 20

Protection of persons not able to consent to organ removal

1. No organ or tissue removal may be carried out on a person who does not have the capacity to consent under Article 5.

2. Exceptionally and under the protective conditions prescribed by law, the removal of regenerative tissue from a person who does not have the capacity to consent may be authorised provided the following conditions are met:

(i) there is no compatible donor available who has the capacity to consent,

(ii) recipient is a brother or sister of the donor,

(iii) the donation must have the potential to be life-saving for the recipient,

(iv) the authorisation provided for under paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 6 has been given specifically and in writing, in accordance with the law and with the approval of the competent body,

(v) the potential donor concerned does not object.

Chapter VII

PROHIBITION OF FINANCIAL GAIN AND DISPOSAL OF A PART OF THE HUMAN BODY

Article 21

Prohibition of financial gain

The human body and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to financial gain.

Article 22

Disposal of a removed part of the human body

When in the course of an intervention any part of a human body is removed, it may be stored and used for a purpose other than that for which it was removed, only if this is done in conformity with appropriate information and consent procedures.

Chapter VIII

INFRINGEMENTS OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE CONVENTION

Article 23

Infringement of the rights or principles

The Parties shall provide appropriate judicial protection to prevent or to put a stop to an unlawful infringement of the rights and principles set forth in this Convention at short notice.

Article 24

Compensation for undue damage

The person who has suffered undue damage resulting from an intervention is entitled to fair compensation according to the conditions and procedures prescribed by law.

Article 25

Sanctions

Parties shall provide for appropriate sanctions to be applied in the event of infringement of the provisions contained in this Convention.

Chapter IX

RELATION BETWEEN THIS CONVENTION AND OTHER PROVISIONS

Article 26

Restrictions on the exercise of the rights

1. No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of the rights and protective provisions contained in this Convention other than such as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interest of public safety, for the prevention of crime, for the protection of public health or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

2. The restrictions contemplated in the preceding paragraph may not be placed on Articles 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 21.

Article 27

Wider protection

None of the provisions of this Convention shall be interpreted as limiting or otherwise affecting the possibility for a Party to grant a wider measure of protection with regard to the application of biology and medicine than is stipulated in this Convention.

Chapter X

PUBLIC DEBATE

Article 28

Public debate

Parties to this Convention shall see to it that: the fundamental questions raised by the developments of biology and medicine are the subject of appropriate public discussion in the light, in particular, of relevant medical, social, economic, ethical and legal implications, and that their possible application is Trade the subject of appropriate consultation.

Chapter XI

INTERPRETATION AND FOLLOW-UP OF THE CONVENTION

Article 29

Interpretation of the Convention

The European Court of Human Rights may give, without direct reference to any specific proceedings pending in a court, advisory opinions on legal questions concerning the interpretation of the present Convention at the request of:

- the Government of a Party, after having informed the other Parties,

- the Committee set up by Article 32, with membership restricted to the Representatives of the Parties to this Convention, by a decision adopted by a two-third majority of votes cast.

Article 30

Reports on the application of the Convention

On receipt of a request from the Secretary General of the Council of Europe any Party shall furnish an explanation of the manner in which its internal law ensures the effective implementation of any of the provisions of the Convention.

Chapter XII

PROTOCOLS

Article 31

Protocols

Protocols may be concluded in pursuance of Article 32, with a view to developing, in specific fields, the principles contained in this Convention.

The Protocols shall be open for signature by Signatories of the Convention. They shall be subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A signatory may not ratify, accept or approve Protocols without previously or simultaneously ratifying accepting or approving the Convention.

Chapter XIII

AMENDMENTS TO THE CONVENTION

Article 32

Amendments to the Convention

1. The tasks assigned to „the Committee” in the present article and in Article 29 shall be carried out by they Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI), or by any other committee designated to do so by the Committee of Ministers.

2. Without prejudice to the specific provisions of Article 29, each member State of the Council of Europe, as well as each Party to the present convention which is not a member of the Council of Europe, may be represented and have one vote in the Committee when the Committee carries out the tasks assigned to it by the present Convention.

3. Any State referred to in Article 33 or invited to accede to the Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 34 which is not Party to this Convention may be represented on the Committee by an observer. If the European Community is not a Party it may be represented on the Committee by an observer.

4. In order to monitor scientific developments, the present Convention shall be examined within the Committee no later than five years from its entry into force and thereafter at such intervals as the Committee may determine.

5. Any proposal for an amendment to this Convention, and any proposal for a Protocol or for an amendment to a Protocol, presented by a party, the Committee or the Committee of Ministers shall be communicated to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe and forwarded by him or her to the member States of the Council of Europe, to the European Community, to any Signatory, to any Party, to any State invited to sign this Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 33 and to any State invited to accede to it in accordance with the provisions of Article 34.

6. The Committee shall examine the proposal not earlier than two months after it has been forwarded by the Secretary General in accordance with paragraph 5. The Committee shall submit the text adopted by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast to the Committee of Ministers for approval. After its approval, this text shall be forwarded to the Parties for ratification, acceptance or approval.

7. Any amendment shall enter into force, in respect of those Parties which have accepted it, on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of one month after the date on which five Parties, including at least four member States of the Council of Europe, have informed the Secretary General that they have accepted it.

In respect of any Party which subsequently accepts it, the amendment shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of one month after the date on which that Party has informed the Secretary General of its acceptance.

Chapter XIV

FINAL CLAUSES

Article 33

Signature, ratification and entry into force

1. This Convention shall be open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe, the non-member States which have participated in its elaboration and by the European Community.

2. This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

3. This Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which five States, including at least four member States of the Council of Europe, have expressed their consent to be bound by the Convention in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of the present article.

4. In respect of any Signatory which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.

Article 34

Non-member States

1. After the entry into force of this Convention, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe may, after consultation of the Parties, invite any non-member State of the Council of Europe to accede to this Convention by a decision taken by the majority provided for in Article 20, sub-paragraph d), of the Statute of the Council of Europe, and by the unanimous vote of the representatives of the Contracting States entitled to sit on the Committee of Ministers.

2. In respect of any acceding State, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of deposit of the instrument of accession with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

Articles 35

Territories

1. Any Signatory may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the territory or territories to which this Convention shall apply. Any other State may formulate the same declaration when depositing its instrument of accession.

2. Any Party may, at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Convention to any other territory specified in the declaration and for whose international relations it is responsible or on whose behalf it is authorised to give undertakings. In respect of such territory the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such declaration by the Secretary General.

3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification addressed to the Secretary General. The withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.

Article 36

Reservations

1. Any State and the European Community may, when signing this Convention or when depositing the instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, make a reservation in respect of any particular provision of the Convention to the extent that any law then in force in its territory is not in conformity with the provision. Reservations of a general character shall not be permitted under this article.

2. Any reservation made under this article shall contain a brief statement of the relevant law.

3. Any Party which extends the application of this Convention to a territory mentioned in the declaration referred to in Article 35, paragraph 2, may, in respect of the territory concerned, make a reservation in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs.

4. Any Party which has made the reservation mentioned in this Article may withdraw it by means of a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of one month after the date of its receipt by the Secretary General.

Article 37

Denunciation

1. Any Party may at any time denounce this Convention by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

2. Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary General.

Article 38

Notifications

The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council, the European Community, any Signatory, any Party and any other State which has been invited to accede to this Convention of

a) any signature;

b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession;

c) any date of entry into force of this Convention in accordance with Articles 33 or 34;

d) any amendment or Protocol adopted in accordance with Article 32, and the date on which such an amendment or Protocol enters into force;

e) any declaration made under the provisions of Article 35;

f) any reservation and withdrawal of reservation made in pursuance of the provisions of Article 36;

g) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Convention.

In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Convention.

Done at Oviedo (Asturias), this 4th day of April 1997, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe, to the European Community, to the non-member States which have participated in the elaboration of this Convention, and to any State invited to accede to this Convention.

Az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására való tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt egyezménye: Egyezmény az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról

Preambulum

Az Európa Tanács tagállamai, más Államok és az Európai Közösség, amelyek a jelen Egyezményt aláírták,

figyelembe véve az Emberi jogok egyetemes nyilatkozatát, amelyet az Egyesült Nemzetek Közgyűlése 1948. december 10-én fogadott el,

figyelembe véve az 1950. november 4. napján kelt Egyezményt az emberi jogok és alapvető szabadságok védelméről,

figyelembe véve az 1961. október 18. napján kelt Európai Szociális Kartát,

figyelembe véve az 1966. december 16. keltezésű Polgári és politikai jogok nemzetközi egyezségokmányát és a Gazdasági, szociális és kulturális jogok nemzetközi egyezségokmányát,

figyelembe véve az 1981. január 28. napján kelt Egyezményt az egyén védelméről tekintettel személyes jellegű adatainak gépi feldolgozására,

figyelembe véve egyúttal a Gyermek jogairól szóló, 1989. november 20. napján kelt egyezményt,

figyelembe véve, hogy az Európa Tanács célja a tagjai közötti nagyobb egység megvalósítása és hogy e cél elérésének egyik módja az emberi jogok és alapvető szabadságok védelme és fejlesztése,

tudatában a biológia és az orvostudomány gyors fejlődésének,

meggyőződve az emberi lény tiszteletben tartásának szükségességéről mind egyéni, mind az emberi fajhoz tartozó mivoltában és elismerve méltósága biztosításának jelentőségét,

annak tudatában, hogy a biológia és az orvostudomány nem megfelelő alkalmazása az emberi méltóságot veszélyeztető cselekményekhez vezethet,

kijelentve, hogy a biológia és az orvostudomány előrehaladását a jelen és a jövő nemzedékek javára kell felhasználni,

hangsúlyozva a nemzetközi együttműködés szükségességét annak érdekében, hogy az egész emberiség élvezze a biológia és az orvostudomány eredményeit,

elismerve a nyilvános vita szorgalmazásának jelentőségét a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazása által felvetett kérdésekről és az azokra adandó válaszokról,

azzal a szándékkal, hogy emlékeztessék a társadalom minden tagját jogaira és felelősségére,

figyelembe véve a Parlamenti Közgyűlés e területen végzett munkáját, ideértve egy bioetikai egyezmény kidolgozására vonatkozó 1160 (1991) számú ajánlását,

attól a szándéktól vezéreltetve, hogy a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazási területén megtegyék a szükséges intézkedéseket az emberi lény méltóságának és az egyén alapvető jogainak és szabadságjogainak védelmére,

az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

I. Fejezet

ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

1. Cikk

Tárgy és cél

A jelen Egyezményben Részes Felek védelemben részesítik az emberi lényt méltóságában és önazonosságában és megkülönböztetés nélkül mindenki számára biztosítják sérthetetlenségének és más jogainak és alapvető szabadságainak tiszteletben tartását a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazásának vonatkozásában.

Minden Részes Állam saját belső jogában megteszi a szükséges intézkedéseket a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek hatályba léptetésére.

2. Cikk

Az emberi lény elsőbbsége

Az emberi lény érdeke és jóléte a társadalom vagy a tudomány puszta érdekével szemben mindenkor elsőbbséget élvez.

3. Cikk

Igazságos hozzáférés az egészségügyi ellátáshoz

A Részes Felek, figyelembe véve az egészségügyi szükségleteket és a rendelkezésre álló forrásokat, megteszik a szükséges intézkedéseket annak érdekében, hogy joghatóságuk területén biztosítsák a megfelelő minőségű egészségügyi ellátáshoz való igazságos hozzáférést.

4. Cikk

Szakmai előírások és kötelezettségek

Minden egészségügyi beavatkozást, beleértve a kutatást is, a vonatkozó szakmai előírások és kötelezettségek tiszteletben tartásával kell végrehajtani.

II. Fejezet

BELEEGYEZÉS

5. Cikk

Általános szabály

Egészségügyi beavatkozás csak azután hajtható végre, ha abba az érintett személy szabadon és tájékozottságon alapuló beleegyezését adta.

Ennek a személynek előzetesen megfelelő tájékoztatást kell kapnia a beavatkozás céljáról és természetéről, valamint következményeiről és kockázatairól.

Az érintett személy beleegyezését bármikor szabadon visszavonhatja.

6. Cikk

Beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyek védelme

1. A 17. és 20. Cikkek fenntartása mellett, beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyen csak saját közvetlen javát szolgáló beavatkozás hajtható végre.

2. Abban az esetben, amikor a törvény szerint, egy kiskorú nem rendelkezik a beavatkozásba való beleegyezés képességével, a beavatkozást csak képviselője, hatóság vagy a törvény által kijelölt személy vagy testület engedélyével lehet végrehajtani.

A kiskorú véleményét korának és érettségi fokának megfelelően egyre meghatározóbb mértékű tényezőként kell figyelembe venni.

3. Abban az esetben, ha a törvény szerint, szellemi fogyatékosság, betegség vagy más hasonló ok miatt a nagykorú nem rendelkezik a beavatkozásba való beleegyezés képességével, a beavatkozást csak képviselője, hatóság vagy a törvény által kijelölt személy vagy testület engedélyével lehet végrehajtani.

Az érintett személyt a lehetőséghez képest be kell vonni az engedélyezési eljárásba.

4. A 2. és 3. bekezdésben említett képviselőt, hatóságot, személyt vagy testületet az 5. Cikkben megjelölteknek megfelelő tájékoztatásban kell részesíteni.

5. A 2. és 3. bekezdésben említett engedély az érintett személy érdekében bármikor visszavonható.

7. Cikk

Elmezavarban szenvedő személyek védelme

A törvényben meghatározott felügyeleti és ellenőrzési, valamint fellebbezési eljárásokat magában foglaló védelmi feltételek előírják, hogy a súlyos elmezavarban szenvedő személyt beleegyezése nélkül csak abban az esetben lehet olyan beavatkozásnak alávetni, amelynek célja e zavar kezelése, ha a kezelés hiánya az érintett egészségének súlyos károsodásával fenyeget.

8. Cikk

Sürgősségi helyzetek

Amikor sürgősségi helyzetben a megfelelő beleegyezés nem szerezhető meg, az érintett személy egészsége érdekében minden orvosilag nélkülözhetetlen beavatkozás azonnal végrehajtható.

9. Cikk

Előzetesen kinyilvánított szándék

Az orvosi beavatkozás időpontjában szándéka kinyilvánítására képtelen állapotban lévő beteg beavatkozással kapcsolatos, előzetesen kinyilvánított szándékát figyelembe kell venni.

III. Fejezet

MAGÁNÉLET ÉS A TÁJÉKOZTATÁSHOZ VALÓ JOG

10. Cikk

Magánélet és a tájékoztatáshoz való jog

1. Minden személynek joga van arra, hogy magánéletét tiszteletben tartsák az egészségével kapcsolatos adataival összefüggésben.

2. Minden személynek joga van ismerni az egészségével kapcsolatosan összegyűjtött minden adatot. Ugyanakkor tiszteletben kell tartani annak a személynek az akaratát is, aki a tájékoztatása mellőzését kívánja.

3. Kivételes esetben, a beteg érdekében a törvény korlátozhatja a 2. bekezdésben meghatározott jogok gyakorlását.

IV. Fejezet

EMBERI GÉNÁLLOMÁNY

11. Cikk

Hátrányos megkülönböztetés tilalma

Az egyén örökletes genetikai állománya alapján történő hátrányos megkülönböztetésének minden formája tilos.

12. Cikk

Generikai előrejelző vizsgálatok

Csak orvosi vagy orvosi kutatási célból, megfelelő genetikai tanácsadás biztosításával lehet olyan vizsgálatokhoz folyamodni, amelyek genetikai betegségek előrejelzésére vagy az érintett személy betegségre való genetikai hajlamának vagy fogékonyságának kimutatására, illetve annak megállapítására szolgálnak, hogy hordoz-e betegséget előidéző gént.

13. Cikk

Beavatkozások az emberi génállományon

Olyan beavatkozás, amelynek tárgya az emberi génállomány megváltoztatása csak megelőzési, kórismézési vagy gyógyítási indokból hajtható végre és csak akkor, ha nem célja a leszármazottak genetikai állományának megváltoztatása.

14. Cikk

A nem megválasztásának tilalma

A születendő gyermek nemének megválasztására nem elfogadható az orvosi segítséggel végzett reprodukciós technikák alkalmazása, kivéve, ha a cél egy nemhez kötötten öröklődő súlyos betegség elkerülése.

V. Fejezet

TUDOMÁNYOS KUTATÁS

15. Cikk

Általános szabály

A tudományos kutatás a biológia és az orvostudomány területén szabadon gyakorolható, amennyiben a jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseit és az emberi lényt védelmező egyéb jogi rendelkezéseket betartják.

16. Cikk

A magukat kutatásnak alávető személyek védelme

Egyéneken bármiféle kutatás kizárólag a következő feltételek együttes fennállása esetén folytatható:

(i) nem létezik az emberen folytatott kutatáshoz hasonló hatékonyságú alternatív módszer,

(ii) a személyt fenyegető esetleges kockázatok nem haladják meg a kutatás lehetséges hasznát,

(iii) a kutatási terv megkapta az illetékes testület jóváhagyását, miután a kutatási terv tudományos helytállóságát független vizsgálatnak vetették alá, beleértve a kutatási cél jelentőségének értékelését, valamint etikai elfogadhatóságának multidiszciplináris vizsgálatát,

(iv) a magukat kutatásnak alávető személyek tájékoztatták jogaikról és az őket védelmező törvényben előírt biztosítékokról,

(v) az 5. Cikkben előírt beleegyezés megadása kifejezett, célzott és írásos formában történt. Ez a beleegyezés bármikor szabadon visszavonható.

17. Cikk

A kutatásba való beleegyezésük képességével nem rendelkező egyének védelme

1. Az 5. Cikkben előírtaknak megfelelő beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező egyénen csak abban az esetben folytatható kutatás, ha a következő feltételek együttesen fennállnak:

(i) a 16. Cikk (i)-(iv) pontjaiban foglalt feltételek teljesülnek;

(ii) a kutatástól várt eredmények valóságos és közvetlen haszonnal járhatnak az egyén egészségére nézve;

(iii) a kutatás beleegyezési képességgel rendelkező alanyokon nem végezhető el hasonló hatékonysággal;

(iv) a 6. Cikk által előírt engedély megadása célzott és írásos formában történt; és

(v) a személy azt nem tagadja meg.

2. Kivételesen és a törvény által előírt védelmi feltételek között, engedélyezhető olyan kutatás, amelynek eredménye nem jár közvetlen haszonnal az érintett személy egészségére nézve, ha az 1. bekezdés (i), (iii), (iv) és (v) pontjában előírt, valamint a következő kiegészítő feltételek együttesen fennállnak:

(i) a kutatás célja, hogy az érintett személy állapotához, betegségéhez vagy zavarához kapcsolódó tudományos ismeretek jelentős gyarapításával meghatározott időn belül hozzájáruljon olyan eredmények eléréséhez, amelyek hasznosak az érintett személy vagy más, azonos korcsoporthoz tartozó vagy azonos betegségben vagy zavarban szenvedő vagy azonos jellegzetességeket mutató személyek számára,

(ii) a kutatás az érintett személy számára csupán minimális kockázattal és minimális igénybevétellel jár együtt.

18. Cikk

Embriókon végzett in vitro kutatás

1. Amennyiben az embriókon végzett in vitro kutatást törvény megengedi, a törvénynek megfelelő védelmet kell biztosítania az embrió számára.

2. Emberi embrió létrehozása kutatás céljából tilos.

VI. Fejezet

ÉLŐ ADOMÁNYOZÓBÓL TÖRTÉNŐ SZERV- ÉS SZÖVETKIVÉTEL ÁTÜLTETÉS CÉLJÁBÓL

19. Cikk

Általános szabály

1. Élő adományozótól átültetés céljából szerv- vagy szövetkivételt csak a befogadó gyógyításának érdekében lehet végrehajtani, és ha nem áll rendelkezésre halott személy megfelelő szerve vagy szövete, vagy más hasonló hatékonyságú gyógyító eljárás.

2. Az 5. Cikkben előírt beleegyezést kifejezetten és célzottan, vagy írásban vagy hivatalos testület előtt kell megadni.

20. Cikk

Szerv kivételébe való beleegyezésük képességével nem rendelkező egyének védelme

1. Semmilyen szerv- vagy szövetkivétel sem végezhető olyan személyen, aki nem rendelkezik az 5. Cikkben előírtnak megfelelő beleegyezési képességgel.

2. Kivételesen és a törvény által előírt védelmi feltételek között engedélyezhető újraképződő szövet kivétele olyan személyből, aki nem rendelkezik beleegyezési képességgel, ha a következő feltételek együttesen fennállnak:

(i) nem áll rendelkezésre beleegyezési képessége birtokában lévő megfelelő adományozó,

(ii) a befogadó az adományozó testvére,

(iii) az adományozás alkalmas a befogadó életének megmentésére,

(iv) a 6. Cikk 2. és 3. bekezdésében előírt engedély megadása célzott és írásos formában, a törvény előírásainak és az illetékes testület jóváhagyásának megfelelően történt,

(v) a lehetséges adományozó az adományozást nem tagadja meg.

VII. Fejezet

A HASZONSZERZÉS TILALMA ÉS AZ EMBERI TESTRÉSZ FELHASZNÁLÁSA

21. Cikk

A haszonszerzés tilalma

Az emberi test és részei, mint ilyenek, nem képezhetik haszonszerzés forrását.

22. Cikk

Az emberi test eltávolított alkotórészének felhasználása

Az emberi test valamely beavatkozás során eltávolított alkotórészét kizárólag a megfelelő tájékoztatási és beleegyezési eljárásokkal összhangban lehet az eltávolítás céljától eltérő célra megőrizni és felhasználni.

VIII. Fejezet

AZ EGYEZMÉNY RENDELKEZÉSEINEK MEGSÉRTÉSE

23. Cikk

A jogok vagy elvek megsértése

A Részes Felek megfelelő bírói védelmet biztosítanak annak érdekében, hogy meggátolják vagy mielőbb megszüntessék a jelen Egyezményben elismert jogok vagy elvek törvénytelen megsértését.

24. Cikk

Indokolatlan kár jóvátétele

Egy beavatkozás következtében indokolatlan kárt szenvedett személynek joga van méltányos jóvátételre a törvény által előírt feltételek és eljárások szerint.

25. Cikk

Szankciók

A Részes Felek megfelelő szankciókat helyeznek kilátásba azokra az esetekre, amelyekben megsértik a jelen Egyezmény előírásait.

IX. Fejezet

A JELEN EGYEZMÉNY VISZONYA MÁS RENDELKEZÉSEKHEZ

26. Cikk

A jogok gyakorlásának korlátozásai

1. A jelen Egyezményben foglalt jogok gyakorlása és a védelmi rendelkezések nem képezhetik más korlátozások tárgyát, mint amelyek törvényben meghatározott esetekben, egy demokratikus társadalomban a közbiztonság, a bűncselekmények megelőzése, a közegészség védelme vagy mások jogainak és szabadságainak védelme érdekében szükséges.

2. Az előző bekezdésben említett korlátozások nem alkalmazhatóak a 11., 13., 14., 16., 17., 19., 20. és 21. Cikkek esetében.

27. Cikk

Szélesebb körű védelem

A jelen Egyezmény egyetlen rendelkezése sem értelmezhető úgy, mint amely korlátozza vagy sérti valamely Részes Állam lehetőségét arra, hogy szélesebb körű védelmet nyújtson a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazását illetően, mint amelyet a jelen Egyezmény előír.

X. Fejezet

NYILVÁNOS VITA

28. Cikk

Nyilvános vita

A jelen Egyezményben Részes Felek ügyelnek arra, hogy a biológia és az orvostudomány fejlődése által felvetett alapkérdések megfelelő nyilvános vita tárgyát képezzék, különösen a jelentős orvosi, társadalmi, gazdasági, etikai és jogi vonatkozások fényében, és hogy az esetleges gyakorlati alkalmazások megfelelő szakmai tanácskozás tárgyát képezzék.

XI. Fejezet

AZ EGYEZMÉNY ÉRTELMEZÉSE ÉS TOVÁBBI ELJÁRÁSOK

29. Cikk

Az Egyezmény értelmezése

Az Emberi Jogok Európai Bírósága, minden bírósági peres eljárástól függetlenül, konzultatív véleményt adhat a jelen Egyezmény értelmezésével kapcsolatos jogi kérdésekben az alábbiak megkeresésére:

- egy Részes Fél kormánya számára, miután erről tájékoztatta a többi Felet,

- a 32. Cikk által felállított és a Részes Felek Képviselőire szűkített összetételű Bizottság, a leadott szavazatok kétharmados többségével meghozott döntése alapján.

30. Cikk

Jelentések az Egyezmény alkalmazásáról

Az Európa Tanács Főtitkárának kérésére valamennyi Részes Fél köteles magyarázatot adni arról, hogy miként biztosítja saját belső jogában az Egyezmény valamennyi rendelkezésének hatékony alkalmazását.

XII. Fejezet

JEGYZŐKÖNYVEK

31. Cikk

Jegyzőkönyvek

A 32. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően Jegyzőkönyvek kerülhetnek kidolgozásra annak érdekében, hogy a jelen Egyezményben foglalt elvek meghatározott területeken továbbfejlesztésre kerüljenek.

A Jegyzőkönyvek az Egyezmény Aláírói számára aláírásra nyitva állnak. A Jegyzőkönyvek megerősítésre, elfogadásra vagy jóváhagyásra szorulnak. Egy aláíró nem erősítheti meg, fogadhatja el vagy hagyhatja jóvá a Jegyzőkönyveket, ha előzetesen vagy egyidejűleg nem erősítette meg, nem fogadta el vagy nem hagyta jóvá az Egyezményt.

XIII. Fejezet

AZ EGYEZMÉNY MÓDOSÍTÁSAI

32. Cikk

Az Egyezmény módosításai

1. A jelen cikkben és a 29. Cikkben a „Bizottságra” ruházott feladatokat a Bioetikai Igazgató Bizottság (CDBI) vagy bármely más, a Miniszteri Bizottság által erre a célra kijelölt bizottság hajtja végre.

2. A 29. Cikkben meghatározott rendelkezések sérelme nélkül, az Európa Tanács minden tagállama, továbbá a jelen Egyezmény minden olyan Részes Fele, amely nem tagja az Európa Tanácsnak, képviseltetheti magát a Bizottságban, amikor az a jelen Egyezmény által ráruházott feladatokat teljesíti, és ott egy szavazattal rendelkezik.

3. A 33. Cikkben megjelölt vagy a 34. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően csatlakozásra felkért minden Állam, amely az Egyezménynek nem Részese, megfigyelővel képviseltetheti magát a Bizottságban. Amennyiben az Európai Közösség nem Részese az Egyezménynek, megfigyelővel képviseltetheti magát a Bizottságban.

4. A tudományos fejlődés figyelembevétele érdekében a jelen Egyezményt a hatálybalépését követően legkésőbb öt évvel, majd ezt követően a Bizottság által meghatározott rendszeres időközönként a Bizottság vizsgálatnak veti alá.

5. Valamely Részes Fél, a Bizottság vagy a Miniszteri Bizottság által beterjesztett, a jelen Egyezményhez kapcsolódó minden módosító javaslatot, valamint jegyzőkönyvjavaslatot vagy egy Jegyzőkönyvhöz kapcsolódó módosító javaslatot az Európa Tanács Főtitkárának tudomására kell hozni, aki azt maga továbbítja az Európa Tanács tagállamainak, az Európai Közösségnek, minden Aláírónak, minden Részes Félnek, minden, a 33. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően aláírásra felkért Államnak és minden, a 34. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően csatlakozásra felkért Államnak.

6. A Bizottság a javaslatot leghamarabb két hónappal azt követően vizsgálja meg, hogy az a Főtitkár által az 5. bekezdésnek megfelelően továbbításra került. A Bizottság a leadott szavazatok kétharmados többségével elfogadott szöveget jóváhagyásra a Miniszteri Bizottság elé terjeszti. A szöveget elfogadása után eljuttatják megerősítésre, elfogadásra vagy jóváhagyásra a Részes Feleknek.

7. Minden módosítás annak a hónapnak az első napján lép hatályba az azt elfogadó Részes Felekre nézve, amely egy hónap elteltével azon időpont után következik be, amikor öt Részes Fél, közöttük az Európa Tanács legalább négy tagállama tájékoztatta a Főtitkárt az elfogadásról.

Minden Részes Fél számára, amely azt később fogadja el, a módosítás annak a hónapnak az első napján lép hatályba, amely egy hónap elteltével következik be azon időpont után, amikor az illető Részes Fél tájékoztatta a Főtitkárt az elfogadásról.

XIV. Fejezet

ZÁRÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

33. Cikk

Aláírás, megerősítés és hatálybalépés

1. A jelen Egyezmény nyitva áll aláírásra az Európa Tanács tagállamai, a kidolgozásában részt vett nem tagállamok és az Európai Közösség részére.

2. A jelen Egyezmény megerősítésre, elfogadásra vagy jóváhagyásra szorul. A megerősítési, elfogadási vagy jóváhagyási okmányokat az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál kell letétbe helyezni.

3. A jelen Egyezmény az azon időpontot követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba, amikor öt Állam, közöttük az Európa Tanács legkevesebb négy tagállama kifejezte, hogy az Egyezményt az előző bekezdés rendelkezéseinek megfelelően magára nézve kötelezőnek ismeri el.

4. Minden Aláíró számára, aki később fejezi ki, hogy az Egyezményt magára nézve kötelezőnek ismeri el, az Egyezmény a megerősítési, elfogadási vagy jóváhagyási okmány letétbe helyezésének időpontját követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

34. Cikk

Az Európa Tanácson kívüli országok

1. Jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépését követően az Európa Tanács Miniszteri Bizottsága a Részes Felekkel folytatott konzultáció után az Európa Tanács Alapszabályának 20. Cikk d) pontja alapján hozott többségi határozattal és a Miniszteri Bizottságban helyet foglalni jogosult szerződő Felek képviselőinek egyhangú szavazatával csatlakozásra kérhet fel bármely olyan Államot, amely nem tagja az Európa Tanácsnak.

2. Az Egyezmény minden csatlakozó Állam számára a csatlakozási okmánynak az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál történő letétbe helyezésének időpontját követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

35. Cikk

Területi hatály

1. Az aláíráskor vagy a megerősítésről, elfogadásról vagy jóváhagyásról szóló okmány letétbe helyezésének időpontjában minden Aláíró meghatározhatja azt a területet vagy azokat a területeket, amely vagy amelyek vonatkozásában a jelen Egyezményt alkalmazni kell. Ugyanezt a nyilatkozatot minden más Állam megteheti csatlakozási okmánya letétbe helyezésekor.

2. Az Európa Tanács Főtitkárához intézett nyilatkozatban ezt követően bármikor minden Részes Fél kiterjesztheti a jelen Egyezmény érvényességét a nyilatkozatában megjelölt minden további területre, amelynek nemzetközi kapcsolataiért felelős vagy amelynek képviseletében kötelezettség vállalására jogosult. E terület vonatkozásában az Egyezmény a nyilatkozatnak a Főtitkár általi kézhezvételének időpontját követő három hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján lép hatályba.

3. A két előző bekezdésnek megfelelően tett minden nyilatkozat, a nyilatkozatban megjelölt bármely terület vonatkozásában a Főtitkárhoz címzett értesítéssel visszavonható. A visszavonás az értesítésnek a Főtitkár általi kézhezvételétől számított három hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá.

36. Cikk

Fenntartások

1. Az Egyezmény aláírása vagy a megerősítésről szóló okirat letétbe helyezése alkalmával bármely Állam és az Európai Közösség az Egyezmény minden egyedi rendelkezésével kapcsolatban fenntartást tehet, amennyiben a területén ekkor hatályban lévő valamely törvény nincs összhangban ezzel a rendelkezéssel. A jelen cikk alapján általános jellegű fenntartásokat nem lehet tenni.

2. A jelen cikk alapján tett minden fenntartásnak tartalmaznia kell a vonatkozó törvény rövid ismertetését.

3. Bármely Részes Fél, amely a jelen Egyezmény hatályát kiterjeszti a 35. Cikk 2. bekezdésnek előírt nyilatkozatban megjelölt valamely területre, az előző pontoknak megfelelően fenntartást tehet az érintett területre vonatkozóan.

4. Bármely Részes Fél, amely a jelen cikkben említett fenntartást tette, fenntartását visszavonhatja az Európa Tanács Főtitkárához címzett nyilatkozat útján. A visszavonás az értesítésnek a Főtitkár általi kézhezvételétől számított egy hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá.

37. Cikk

Felmondás

1. Bármely Részes Fél bármikor felmondhatja a jelen Egyezményt az Európa Tanács Főtitkárához intézett értesítés útján.

2. A felmondás az értesítésnek a Főtitkár általi kézhezvételétől számított három hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá.

38. Cikk

Értesítések

Az Európa Tanács Főtitkára értesíti a Tanács tagállamait, az Európai Közösséget, valamennyi Aláírót, valamennyi Részes Felet és minden további, a jelen Egyezményhez való csatlakozásra felkért Államot:

a) minden aláírásról;

b) minden megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási okmány letétbe helyezéséről;

c) a jelen Egyezmény 33. vagy 34. Cikkeiben meghatározott valamennyi hatálybalépési időpontról;

d) a 32. Cikknek megfelelően elfogadott valamennyi módosításról vagy jegyzőkönyvről és arról az időpontról, amikor ez a módosítás vagy jegyzőkönyv hatályba lép;

e) a 35. Cikk rendelkezései alapján megtett minden nyilatkozatról;

f) a 36. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően megtett minden fenntartásról és visszavonásról;

g) minden, jelen Egyezménnyel összefüggő cselekményről, értesítésről és tájékoztatásról.

Ennek hiteléül az alulírottak, kellő felhatalmazás birtokában, aláírták a jelen Egyezményt.

Készült Oviedóban (Asztúria), 1997. április 4. napján, angol és francia nyelven, mindkét szöveg egyaránt hiteles, egyetlen példányban, amelyet az Európa Tanács levéltárában kell letétbe helyezni. Az Európa Tanács Főtitkára az Európa Tanács minden tagállamának, az Európai Közösségnek, a jelen Egyezmény kidolgozásában részt vett nem tagállamoknak és minden, jelen Egyezményhez való csatlakozásra felkért Államnak hitelesített másolatot küld.”

3. § A Jegyzőkönyv angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine, on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings

The member States of the Council of Europe, the other States and the European Community Signatories to this Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine,

noting scientific developments in the field of mammal cloning, particularly through embryo splitting and nuclear transfer,

mindful of the progress that some cloning techniques themselves may bring to scientific knowledge and its medical application,

considering that the cloning of human beings may become a technical possibility,

having noted that embryo splitting may occur naturally and sometimes result in the birth of genetically identical twins,

considering however that the instrumentalisation of human beings through the deliberate creation of genetically identical human beings is contrary to human dignity and thus constitutes a misuse of biology and medicine,

considering also the serious difficulties of a medical, psychological and social nature that such a deliberate biomedical practice might imply for all the individuals involved,

considering the purpose of the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, in particular the principle mentioned in Article 1 aiming to protect the dignity and identity of all human beings,

have agreed as follows:

Article 1

1. Any intervention seeking to create a human being genetically identical to another human being, whether living or dead, is prohibited.

2. For the purpose of this article, the term human being „genetically identical” to another human being means a human being sharing with another the same nuclear gene set.

Article 2

No derogation from the provisions of this Protocol shall be made under Article 26, paragraph 1, of the Convention.

Article 3

As between the Parties, the provisions of Articles 1 and 2 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional articles to the Convention and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.

Article 4

This Protocol shall be open for signature by Signatories to the Convention. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A Signatory may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol unless it has previously or simultaneously ratified, accepted or approved the Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

Article 5

1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which five States, including at least four member States of the Council of Europe, have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 4.

2. In respect of any Signatory which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.

Article 6

1. After the entry into force of this Protocol, any State which has acceded to the Convention may also accede to this Protocol.

2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of an instrument of accession which shall take effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of its deposit.

Article 7

1. Any Party may at any time denounce his Protocol by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

2. Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.

Article 8

The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of Europe, the European Community, any Signatory, any Party and any other State which has been invited to accede to the Convention of:

a) any signature;

b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession;

c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 5 and 6;

d) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Protocol.

In witness where of the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.

Done at Paris, this 12th day of January 1998, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a singe copy which shall be deposited in the archives or the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe to the non-member States which have participated in the elaboration of this Protocol, to any State invited to accede to the Convention and to the European Community.

Az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt egyezménye: az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról szóló egyezménynek az emberi lény klónozásának tilalmáról szóló, Párizsban, 1998. január 12-én kelt Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyve

Az Európa Tanács Tagállamai, más Államok és az Európai Közösség, amelyek a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt egyezménye: Az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról szóló egyezményéhez aláírták,

tudomásul véve az emlősök klónozása területén bekövetkezett tudományos haladást, különösen az embriódivízió és sejtmag-átvitel révén,

tudatában annak a haladásnak, amelyet bizonyos klónozási eljárások révén lehet elérni a tudományos megismerés és az orvosi alkalmazások területén,

figyelembe véve, hogy az emberi lények klónozása technikai lehetőséggé válhat,

tudomásul véve, hogy az embriódivízió bekövetkezhet természetes módon is, ami esetenként genetikailag azonos ikrek születéséhez vezet,

figyelembe véve ugyanakkor, hogy az emberi lénynek a genetikailag azonos emberi lények szándékos létrehozásával történő eszközzé alacsonyítása ellenkezik az emberi méltósággal és a biológia és az orvostudomány nem helyénvaló alkalmazását jelenti,

figyelembe véve egyúttal azokat a jelentős orvosi, lélektani és társadalmi jellegű nehézségeket, amelyeket egy ilyenfajta szándékosan alkalmazott orvosbiológiai gyakorlat jelenthet minden érintett személy számára,

figyelembe véve az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról szóló Egyezmény tárgyát, különösen annak az 1. Cikkében foglalt elvet, amely az emberi lény méltóságának és azonosságának védelmét célozza

az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

1. Cikk

1. Tiltott minden olyan beavatkozás, amelynek célja egy másik élő vagy holt emberi lénnyel genetikailag azonos emberi lény létrehozása.

2. A jelen cikk értelmében az egy másik emberi lénnyel „genetikailag azonos” emberi lény kifejezés azt az emberi lényt jelenti, akinek egy másikéval genetikailag megegyező sejtmagállománya van.

2. Cikk

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv rendelkezései alól semmilyen kivétel sem engedélyezett az Egyezmény 26. Cikkének 1. bekezdésére való hivatkozással.

3. Cikk

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv Részesei az 1. és 2. Cikkeket az Egyezmény kiegészítő cikkeinek tekintik, következésképpen az Egyezmény valamennyi rendelkezése ennek megfelelően alkalmazandó.

4. Cikk

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv aláírásra az Egyezmény Aláírói részére áll nyitva. A Jegyzőkönyvet meg kell erősíteni, el kell fogadni vagy jóvá kell hagyni. A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet egy Aláíró sem erősítheti meg, fogadhatja el vagy hagyhatja jóvá, ha előzetesen vagy egyidőben nem erősítette meg, nem fogadta el vagy nem hagyta jóvá az Egyezményt. A megerősítési, elfogadási vagy jóváhagyási okmányokat az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál kell letétbe helyezni.

5. Cikk

1. A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv azt az időpontot követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba, amikor öt Állam, közöttük az Európa Tanács legalább négy Tagállama kifejezte, hogy a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet a 4. Cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelően magára nézve kötelezőnek ismeri el.

2. Minden Aláíró számára, aki később ismeri el magára nézve kötelezőnek a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet, a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv a megerősítési, az elfogadási vagy a jóváhagyási okmány letétbe helyezésének időpontját követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

6. Cikk

1. A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv hatálybalépését követően minden Állam, csatlakozhat a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvhöz is, amennyiben csatlakozott az Egyezményhez.

2. A csatlakozás a csatlakozási okmánynak az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál történő letétbe helyezése útján történhet, és a letétbe helyezés időpontját követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

7. Cikk

1. Bármely Fél bármikor felmondhatja a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet az Európa Tanács Főtitkárához intézett értesítés útján.

2. A felmondás az értesítésnek a Főtitkár általi kézhezvételétől számított három hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá.

8. Cikk

Az Európa Tanács Főtitkára értesíti az Európa Tanács Tagállamait, az Európai Közösséget, valamennyi Aláírót, valamennyi Részes Felet és minden további, az Egyezményhez való csatlakozásra felkért Államot:

a) minden aláírásról;

b) minden megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási okmány letétbe helyezéséről;

c) a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv 5. és 6. Cikkeiben meghatározott valamennyi hatálybalépési időpontról;

d) a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvvel összefüggő minden cselekményről, értesítésről és tájékoztatásról.

Ennek hiteléül az alulírottak, kellő felhatalmazás birtokában, aláírták a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet.

Készült Párizsban, 1998. január 12. napján, angol és francia nyelven, amelyek mindegyike egyaránt hiteles, egyetlen példányban, amelyet az Európa Tanács levéltárában kell letétbe helyezni. Az Európa Tanács Főtitkára az Európa Tanács minden tagállamának, a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv kidolgozásában részt vett nem tagállamoknak, minden, az Egyezményhez való csatlakozásra felkért Államnak és az Európai Közösségnek hitelesített másolatot küld.”

4. § Ez a törvény 2002. május 1-jén lép hatályba.