1997. évi LXXXVI. törvény

a nemzetközi pénzügyi lízingről szóló, Ottawában, 1988. május 28-án kelt UNIDROIT Egyezmény kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés a nemzetközi pénzügyi lízingről szóló, Ottawában, 1988. május 28-án kelt UNIDROIT Egyezményt (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) e törvénnyel kihirdeti. (A Magyar Köztársaságnak az Egyezményhez való csatlakozásáról szóló nyilatkozat letétbe helyezése 1996. május 7-én megtörtént, így az Egyezmény a Magyar Köztársaság vonatkozásában 1996. december 1-jén lépett hatályba.)

2. § Az Egyezmény eredeti angol nyelvű szövege és ennek hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„UNIDROIT CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL LEASING

The states parties to this Convention,

recognising the importance of removing certain legal impediments to the international financial leasing of equipment, while maintaing a fair balance of interests between the different parties to the transaction,

aware of the need to make international financial leasing more available,

conscious of the fact that the rules of law governing the traditional contract of hire need to be adapted to the distinctive triangular relationship created by the financial leasing transaction,

recognising therefore the desirability of formulating certain uniform rules relating primarily to the civil and commercial law aspects of international financial leasing,

have agreed as follows:

CHAPTER I

SPHERE OF APPLICATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

1. This Convention governs a financial leasing transaction as described in paragraph 2 in which one party (the lessor),

a) on the specifications of another party (the lessee), enters into an agreement (the supply agreement) with a third party (the supplier) under which the lessor acquires plant, capital goods or other equipment (the equipment) on terms approved by the lessee so far as they concern its interests, and

b) enters into an agreement (the leasing agreement) with the lessee, granting to the lessee the right to use the equipment in return for the payment of rentals.

2. The financial leasing transaction referred to in the precious paragraph is a transaction which includes the following characteristics:

a) the lessee specifies the equipment and selects the supplier without relying primarily on the skill and judgment of the lessor;

b) the equipment is acquired by the lessor in connection with a leasing agreement which, to the knowledge of the supplier, either has been made or is to be made between the lessor and the lessee; and

c) the rentals payable under the lesasing agreement are calculated so as to take into account in particular the amortisation of the whole or a substantial part of the cost of the equipment.

3. This Convention applies whether or not the lessee has or subsequently acquires the option to buy the equipment or to hold it on lease for a further period, and whether or not for a nominal price or rental.

4. This Convention applies to financial leasing transactions in relation to all equipment save that which is to be used primarily for the lessee’s personal, family or household purposes.

Article 2

In the case of one or more sub-leasing transactions involving the same equipment, this Convention applies to each transaction which is a financial leasing transaction and is otherwise subject to this Convention as if the person from whom the first lessor (as defined in paragraph 1 of the previous article) acquired the equipment were the supplier and as if the agreement under which the equipment was so acquired were the supply agreement.

Article 3

1. This Convention applies when the lessor and the lessee have their places of business in different States and:

a) those States and the State in which the supplier has its place of business are Contracting States; or

b) both the supply agreement and the leasing agreement are governed by the law of a Contracting State.

2. A reference in this Convention to a party’s place of business shall, if it has more than one place of business, mean the place of business which has the closest relationship to the relevant agreement and its performance, having regard to the circumstances known to or contemplated by the parties at any time before or at the conclusion of that agreement.

Article 4

1. The provisions of this Convention shall not cease to apply merely because the equipment has become a fixture to or incorporated in land.

2. Any question whether or not the equipment has become a fixture to or incorporated in land, and if so the effect on the rights inter se of the lessor and a person having real rights in the land, shall be determined by the law of the State where the land is situated.

Article 5

1. The application of this Convention may be excluded only if each of the parties to the supply agreement and each of the parties to the leasing agreement agree to exclude it.

2. Where the application of this Convention has not been excluded in accordance with the previous paragraph, the parties may, in their relations with each other, derogate from or vary the effect of any of its provisions except as stated in Articles 8 (3) and 13 (3) b) and (4).

Article 6

1. In the interpretation of this Convention, regard is to be had to its object and purpose as set forth in the preamble, to its international character and to the need to promote uniformity in its application and the observance of good faith in international trade.

2. Questions concerning matters governed by this Convention which are not expressly settled in it are to be settled in conformity with the general principles on which it is based or, in the absence of such principles, in conformity with the law applicable by virtue of the rules of private international law.

CHAPTER II

RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PARTIES

Article 7

1. a) The lessor’s real rights in the equipment shall be valid against the lessee’s trustee in bankruptcy and creditors, including creditors who have abtained an attachment or execution.

b) For the purposes of this paragraph „trustee in bankruptcy” includes a liquidator, administrator or other person appointed to administer the lessee’s estate for the benefit of the general body of creditors.

2. Where by the applicable law the lesser’s real rights in the aquipment are valid against a person referred to in the previous paragraph only on compliance with rules as to public notice, those rights shall be valid against that person only if there has been compliance with such rules.

3. For the purposes of the previous paragraph the applicable law is the law of the State which, at the time when a person referred to in paragraph 1 becomes entitled to invoke the rules referred to in the previous paragraph, is:

a) in the case of a registered ship, the State in which it is registered in the name of the owner (for the purposes of this sub-paragraph a bareboat charterer is deemed not to be the owner);

b) in the case of an aircraft which is registered pursuant to the Convention on International Civil Aviation done at Chicago on 7 December 1944, the State in which it is so registered;

c) in the case of other equipment of a kind normally moved from one State to another, including an aircraft engine, the State in which the lessee has its principal place of business;

d) in the case of all other equipment, the State in which the equipment is situated.

4. Paragraph 2 shall not affect the provisions of any other treaty under which the lessor’s real rights in the equipment are required to be recognised.

5. This article shall not affect the priority of any creditor having:

a) a consensual or non-consensual lien or security interest in the equipment arising otherwise than by virtue of an attachment or execution, or

b) any right of arrest, detention or disposition conferred specifically in relation to ships or aircraft under the law applicable by virtue of the rules of private international law.

Article 8

1. a) Except as otherwise provided by this Convention or states in the leasing agreement, the lessor shall not incur any liability to the lessee in respect of the equipment save to the extent that the lessee has suffered loss as the result of its reliance on the lessor’s skill and judgment and of the lessor’s intervention in the selection of the supplier or the specifications of the equipment.

b) The lessor shall not, in its capacity of lessor, be liable to third parties for death, personal injury or damage to property caused by the equipment.

c) The above provisions of this paragraph shall not govern any liability of the lessor in any other capacity, for example as owner.

2. The lessor warrants that the lessee’s quiet possession will not be disturbed by a person who has a superior title or right, or who claims a superior title or right and acts under the authority of a court, where such title, right or claim is not derived from an act or omission of the lessee.

3. The parties may not derogate from or vary the effect of the provisions of the previous paragraph in so far as the superior title, right or claim is derived form an international or grossly negligent act or omission of the lessor.

4. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not affect any broader warranty of quiet possession by the lessor which is mandatory under the law applicable by virtue of the rules of private international law.

Article 9

1. The lessee shall take proper care of the equipment, use it in a reasonable manner and keep it in the condition in which it was delivered, subject to fair wear and tear and to any modification of the equipment agreed by the parties.

2. When the leasing agreement comes to an end the lessee, unless exercising a right to buy the equipment or to hold the equipment on lease for a further period, shall return the equipment to the lessor in the condition specified in the previous paragraph.

Article 10

1. The duties of the supplier under the supply agreement shall also be owed to the lessee as if it were a party to that agreement and as if the equipment were to be supplied directly to the lessee. However, the supplier shall not be liable to both the lessor and the lessee in respect of the same damage.

2. Nothing in this article shall entitle the lessee to terminate or rescind the supply agreement without the consent of the lessor.

Article 11

The lessee’s rights derived from the supply agreement under this Convention shall not be affected by a variation of any term of the supply agreement previously approved by the lessee unless it consented to that variation.

Article 12

1. Where the equipment is not delivered or is delivered late or fails to conform to the supply agreement:

a) the lessee has the right as against the lessor to reject the equipment or to terminate the leasing agreement; and

b) the lessor has the right to remedy its failure to tender equipment in conformity with the supply agreement,

as if the lessee had agreed to buy the equipment from the lessor under the same terms as those of the supply agreement.

2. A right conferred by the previous paragraph shall be exercisable in the same manner and shall be lost in the same circumstances as if the lessee had agreed to buy the equipment from the lessor under the same terms as those of the supply agreement.

3. The lessee shall be entitled to withhold rentals payable under the leasing agreement until the lessor has remedied its failure to tender equipment in conformity with the supply agreement or the lessee has lost the right to reject the equipment.

4. Where the lessee has exercised a right to terminate the leasing agreement, the lessee shall be entitled to recover any rentals and other sums paid in advance, less a reasonable sum for any benefit the lessee has derived from the equipment.

5. The lessee shall have no other claim against the lessor for non-delivery, delay in delivery or delivery of non-conforming equipment except to the extent to which this results from the act or omission of the lessor.

6. Nothing in this article shall affect the lessee’s rights against the supplier under Article 10.

Article 13

1. In the event of default by the lessee, the lessor may recover accrued unpaid rentals, together with interest and damages.

2. Where the lessee’s default is substantial, then subject to paragraph 5 the lessor may also require accelarated payment of the value of the future rentals, where the leasing agreement and after such termination:

a) recover possession of the equipment; and

b) recover such damages as will place the lesssor in the position in which it would have been had the lessee performed the leasing agreement in accordance with its terms.

3. a) The leasing agreement may provide for the manner in which the damages recoverable under paragraph 2 b) are to be computed.

b) Such provision shall be enforceable between the parties unless it would result in damages substantially in excess of those provided for under paragraph 2 b). The parties may not derogate from or vary the effect of the provisions of the present sub-paragraph.

4. Where the lessor has terminated the leasing agreement, it shall not be entitled to enforce a term of that agreement providing for acceleration of payment of future rentals, but the value of such rentals may be taken into account in computing damages under paragraphs 2 b) and 3. The parties may not derogate from or vary the effect of the provisions of the present paragraph.

5. The lessor shall not be entitled to exercise its right of acceleration or its right of termination under paragraph 2 unless it has by notice given the lessee a reasonable opportunity of remedying the default so far as the same may be remedied.

6. The lessor shall not be entitled to recover damages to the extent that it has failed to take all reasonable steps to mitigate its loss.

Article 14

1. The lessor may transfer or otherwise deal with all or any of its rights in the equipment or under the leasing agreement. Such a transfer shall not relieve the lessor of any of its duties under the leasing agreement or alter either the nature of the leasing agreement or its legal treatment as provided in this Convention.

2. The lessee may transfer the right to the use of the equipment or any other rights under the leasing agreement only with the consent of the lessor and subject to the rights of third parties.

CHAPTER III

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 15

1. This Convention is open for signature at the concluding meeting of the Diplomatic Conference for the Adoption of the Draft Unidroit Conventions on International Factoring and International Financial Leasing and will remain open for signature by all States at Ottawa until 31 December 1990.

2. This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States which have signed it.

3. This Convention is open for accession by all States which are not signatory States as from the date it is open for signature.

4. Ratification, acceptance, approval or accession is effected by the deposit of a formal instrument to that effect with the depositary.

Article 16

1. This Convention enters into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the date of deposit of the third instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

2. For each State that ratifies, accepts, approves, or accedes to this Convention after the deposit of the third instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, this Convention enters into force in respect of that State on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.

Article 17

This Convention does not prevail over any treaty which has already been or may be entered into; in particular it shall not affect any liability imposed on any person by existing or future treaties.

Article 18

1. If a Contracting State has two or more territorial units in which different systems of law are applicable in relation to the matters dealt with in this Convention, it may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, declare that this Convention is to extend to all its territorial units or only to one or more of them, and may substitute its declaration by another declaration at any time.

2. These declarations are to be notified to the depositary and are to state expressly the territorial units to which the Convention extends.

3. If, by virtue of a declaration under this article, this Convention extends to one or more but not all of the territorial units of a Contracting State, and if the place of business of a party is located in that State, and if the place of business, for the purposes of this Convention, is considered not to be in a Contracting State, unless it is in a territorial unit to which the Convention extends.

4. If a Contracting State makes no declaration under paragraph 1, the Convention is to extend to all territorial units of that State.

Article 19

1. Two or more Contracting States which have the same or closely related legal rules on matters governed by this Convention may at any time declare that the Convention is not to apply where the supplier, the lessor and the lessee have their places of business in those States. Such declarations may be made jointly or by reciprocal unilateral declarations.

2. A Contracting State which has the same or closely related legal rules on matters governed by this Convention as one or more non-Contracting States may at any time declare that the Convention is not to apply where the supplier, the lessor and the lessee have their places of business in those States.

3. If a State which is the object or a declaration under the previous paragraph subsenquently becomes a Contracting State, the declaration made will, as form the date on which the Convention enters into force in respect of the new Contracting State, have the effect of a declaration made under paragraph 1, provided that the new Contracting State joins in such declaration or makes a reciprocal unilateral declaration.

Article 20

A Contracting State may declare at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or accession that it will substitute its domestic law for Article 8 (3) if its domestic law does not permit the lessor to exclude its liability for its default or negligence.

Article 21

1. Declarations made under this Convention at the time of signature are subject to confirmation upon ratification, acceptance or approval.

2. Declarations and confirmations of declarations are to be in writing and to be formally notified to the depositary.

3. A declaration takes effect simultaneously with the entry into force of this Convention in respect of the State concerned. However, a declaration of which the depositary receives formal notification after such entry into force takes effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the date of its receipt by the depositary. Reciprocal unilateral declarations under Article 19 take effect on the first day of the mont following the expiration of six monts after the receipt of the latest declaration by the depositary.

4. Any State which mades a declaration under this Convention may withdraw it at any time by a formal notification in writing addressed to the depositary. Such withdrawal is to take effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the date of the receipt of the notification by the depositary.

5. A withdrawal of a declaration made under Article 19 renders inoperative in relation to the withdrawing State, as from the date on which the withdrawal takes effect, any joint or reciprocal unilateral declaration made by another State under that article.

Article 22

No reservations are permitted except those expressly authorised in this Convention.

Article 23

This Convention applies to a finical leasing transaction when the leasing agreement and the supply agreement are both concluded on or after the date on which the Convention enters into force in respect of the Contracting States referred to in Article 3 (1) a), or of the Contracting State or States referred to in paragraph 1 b) of that article.

Article 24

1. This Convention may be denounced by any Contracting State at any time after the date on which it enters int force for that State.

2. Denunciation is effected by the deposit of an instrument to that effect whith the depositary.

3. A denunciation takes effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of six months after the deposit of the instrument of denunciation with the depositary. Where a longer period for the denunciation to take effect is specified in the instrument of denunciation it takes effect upon the expiration of such longer period after its deposit with the depositary.

Article 25

1. This Convention shall be deposited with the Government of Canada.

2. The Government of Canada shall:

a) inform all States which have signed or acceded to this Convention and the President of the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (Unidroit) of:

(i) each new signature or deposit of an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, together with the date thereof;

(ii) each declaration made under Articles 18,19 and 20;

(iii) the withdrawal of any declaration made under Article 21 (4);

(iv) the date of entry into force of this Convention;

(v) the deposit of an instrument of denunciation of this Convention together with the date of its deposit and the date on which it takes effect;

b) transmit certified true copies of this Convention to all signatory States, to all States acceding to the Convention and to the President of the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (Unidroit).

In witness whereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorised by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention.

Done at ottawa, this twenty-eighth day of May, one thousand nine hundred and eighty-eight, in a single original, of which the English and French texts are equally authentic.

UNIDROIT EGYEZMÉNY a nemzetközi pénzügyi lízingről

Az Egyezményben részes Államok,

felismerve a műszaki berendezések nemzetközi pénzügyi lízingjének (financial leasing) útjában álló bizonyos jogi akadályok kiküszöbölésének jelentőségét, megőrizve eközben az ügylet különböző felei között a tisztességes érdekegyensúlyt,

átlátva annak szükségességét, hogy a nemzetközi pénzügyi lízing hozzáférhetőbbé váljék,

tudatában annak a körülménynek, hogy a hagyományos bérleti szerződésre vonatkozó jogszabályokat hozzá kell igazítani ahhoz a jellegzetesen háromoldalú jogviszonyhoz, amit a pénzügyi lízing ügylet létrehoz,

felismerve annak kívánatos voltát, hogy a nemzetközi pénzügyi lízingről olyan egységes szabályokat hozzanak létre, amelyek elsősorban annak polgári és kereskedelmi jogi vonatkozásairól rendelkeznek,

megállapodtak a következőkben:

I. Fejezet

Alkalmazási terület és általános rendelkezések

1. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény a 2. pont szerinti olyan nemzetközi pénzügyi lízing ügyletre alkalmazandó, amelynek értelmében az egyik fél (lízingbeadó)

a) a másik fél (lízingbevevő) részletes leírásának megfelelően szerződést köt egy harmadikkal (szállító), amely szerint a lízingbeadó felszereléseket, gépeket vagy egyéb berendezéseket (a továbbiakban: berendezés) vesz meg a lízingbevevő által jóváhagyott olyan feltételekkel, amelyeket a lízingbevevő az érdekeivel megegyezőeknek ítél, és

b) olyan szerződést (lízing szerződés) köt a lízingbevevővel, amely alapján a lízingbevevő bér fizetése ellenében jogosult a berendezés használatára.

2. Az 1. pontban meghatározott nemzetközi pénzügyi lízing ügylet jellemzői:

a) a lízingbevevő - a lízingbeadó szakértelmére és véleményére tekintet nélkül - meghatározza a berendezést és kiválasztja a szállítót, a lízingbeadó szakértelmére és véleményére tekintet nélkül;

b) a berendezést a lízingbeadó olyan lízing szerződéssel összefüggésben veszi meg, amelyet a szállító tudomása szerint a lízingbeadó és a lízingbevevő már megkötött, vagy meg fog kötni; és

c) a lízing szerződés alapján fizetendő díj megállapításánál alapvetően a berendezés árának, vagy az ár jelentős részének az amortizáció következtében történő csökkenését veszik figyelembe.

3. Az Egyezmény alkalmazását nem érinti, hogy a lízingbevevőnek van-e, vagy a szerződéskötést követően szerez-e vételi jogot a berendezésre, illetve további időszakra vonatkozó bérleti jogot, akár névleges ár vagy bér megfizetése ellenében.

4. Az Egyezmény mindenfajta berendezés lízing szerződésére alkalmazandó, kivéve azt, ami elsősorban a lízingbevevő személyes, családi vagy háztartási használatára szolgál.

2. Cikk

Ugyanazon berendezésre vonatkozó egy vagy több allízing ügylet esetén az Egyezmény mindegyik ügyletre alkalmazandó, amely nemzetközi pénzügyi lízing ügylet, s amely egyébként az Egyezmény hatálya alá tartozik. Ez esetben az a személy, akitől az első lízingbeadó a berendezést megvásárolta (amint az 1. Cikk 1. pontja meghatározza) a szállító, és az a szerződés pedig, amellyel így megveszik a berendezést, az adásvételi szerződés lesz.

3. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény alkalmazandó, ha a lízingbeadó és lízingbevevő telephelye különböző Államban van, és

a) ezek az Államok, valamint az az Állam, amelyben a szállító telephelye van, Szerződő Államok, vagy

b) mind az adásvételi szerződésre, mind pedig a lízing szerződésre Szerződő Állam joga irányadó.

2. Az Egyezménynek valamely fél telephelyére való utalása, ha több helyen folytatja üzleti tevékenységét, azt a telephelyet jelenti, amely a vonatkozó szerződéssel és annak teljesítésével a legszorosabb kapcsolatban van, figyelembe véve azokat a körülményeket, amelyeket a szerződéskötés előtt bármikor vagy a szerződés megkötésekor a felek ismertek vagy számításba vettek.

4. Cikk

1. Nem zárja ki az Egyezmény alkalmazását az a körülmény, hogy a berendezést valamely ingatlanra ráépítették vagy oda beépítették.

2. Ha a berendezés az ingatlan tartozékává vagy alkotó részévé vált, akkor az ezzel és ennek a jogi hatásával kapcsolatos minden kérdés a lízingbeadó és azon személy között, akinek az ingatlanra dologi joga van, azon Állam joga szerint döntendő el, amelynek területén az ingatlan fekszik.

5. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény alkalmazása csak akkor zárható ki, ha ehhez az adásvételi szerződést, valamint a lízing szerződést megkötő valamennyi fél hozzájárul.

2. Ha a felek az Egyezmény alkalmazását a jelen cikk 1. pont szerint nem zárták ki, úgy egymás közötti viszonyukban a 8. Cikk 3., valamint a 13. Cikk 3. b) és 4. pontjai kivételével bármely rendelkezés alkalmazását kizárhatják, vagy eltérhetnek azoktól.

6. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény értelmezése során figyelemmel kell lenni a Bevezetőben meghatározott tárgyára és céljára, nemzetközi jellegére és annak a szükségességére, hogy előmozdítsa az Egyezmény egységes alkalmazását, valamint a jóhiszeműség érvényesítését a nemzetközi kereskedelemben.

2. Az Egyezmény hatálya alá tartozó kérdéseket, amelyek itt kifejezetten szabályozva nincsenek, az Egyezmény alapjául szolgáló általános elvek, ilyenek hiányában pedig a nemzetközi magánjog szabályai alapján alkalmazandó jog rendelkezései szerint kell elbírálni.

II. Fejezet

A felek jogai és kötelezettségei

7. Cikk

1. a) A lízingbeadónak a berendezésen fennálló dologi jogai a lízingbevevő felszámolójával, valamint hitelezőivel szemben is érvényesíthetők, ideértve azokat a hitelezőket is, akik a berendezést zár alá vették, vagy arra vonatkozóan végrehajtási eljárás megindítását kérték.

b) Jelen bekezdés alkalmazásában felszámoló többek között az a vagyonkezelő vagy a lízingbevevő vagyonának kezelésére kijelölt bármilyen más személy, aki a lízingbevevő vagyonát a hitelezők összessége érdekében kezeli.

2. Ha az alkalmazandó jog szerint a lízingbeadó javára a berendezést terhelő dologi jognak az 1. pontban meghatározott személlyel szembeni érvényesítéséhez (hatósági nyilvántartás vagy) hirdetményi közlés szükséges, ezek a jogok e személy ellen csak akkor érvényesülnek, ha az említett szabályokat megtartották.

3. A 2. pont alkalmazásában annak az Államnak a joga alkalmazandó, amelyben:

a) a nyilvántartásba vett hajó esetén, a hajó a tulajdonos nevére be van jegyezve (e rendelkezés alkalmazásában a hajót felszerelés nélkül bérlő személy nem tekinthető a hajó tulajdonosának);

b) repülőgép esetén (amelyet a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülésről 1944. december 7-én, Chicagóban aláírt Egyezmény értelmében nyilvántartásba vettek), a repülőgép be van jegyezve;

c) egyéb olyan berendezés esetén, amit egyik országból a másikba szállítanak, ideértve a repülőgépmotort is, az az Állam, amelyben a lízingbevevő székhelye van;

d) minden más berendezés esetén, ahol a berendezés fekszik.

4. A 2. pont rendelkezése nem érinti egyéb olyan nemzetközi szerződések hatályát, amelyek alapján a lízingbeadónak a berendezésen fennálló dologi jogát el kell ismerni.

5. A jelen cikk rendelkezései nem érintik az olyan hitelező elsőbbségét, akinek

a) a berendezésen nem végrehajtáson vagy zár alá vételen alapuló, hanem szerződéses vagy szerződésen kívüli visszatartási joga vagy egyéb jogi biztosítéka áll fenn, vagy

b) a nemzetközi magánjog szabályai alapján alkalmazandó jog a hajók vagy repülőgépek vonatkozásában végrehajtási, visszatartási vagy rendelkezési jogot biztosít.

8. Cikk

1. a) Ha az Egyezmény vagy a lízing szerződés másként nem rendelkezik, a lízingbeadót a berendezés tekintetében semmiféle felelősség nem terheli a lízingbevevővel szemben, kivéve, ha a lízingbevevő kárát az okozta, hogy bízott a lízingbeadó szakértelmében és véleményében, és a lízingbeadó közreműködött a szállító kiválasztásában, vagy a berendezés részletes leírásában.

b) A lízingbeadó ebben a minőségében harmadik személlyel szemben nem felel a berendezés által okozott haláleset, személyi sérülés vagy dologi kár miatt.

c) Az a) és b) pontok rendelkezései nem érintik a lízingbeadónak egyéb, például tulajdonosi minőségén alapuló felelősségét.

2. A lízingbeadó szavatolja a lízingbevevő zavartalan birtoklását olyan személlyel szemben, akinek tulajdonjoga vagy erősebb jogcíme van a berendezés felett, vagy aki ezt bírói úton érvényesíti, feltéve, hogy ez a jog vagy igény nem a lízingbevevő tevékenységének vagy mulasztásának következménye.

3. A felek az előző pont rendelkezéseitől nem térhetnek el, ha a tulajdonjog, más erősebb jog, valamint igény a lízingbeadó szándékos vagy súlyosan gondatlan tevékenységének vagy ilyen mulasztásának a következménye.

4. A 2. és 3. pont rendelkezései nem érintik a lízingbeadónak a birtokháborítás miatti vagy egyéb zavaró magatartása miatti súlyosabb felelősségét, amely a nemzetközi magánjog szabályai értelmében irányadó jog kötelezően alkalmazandó rendelkezései szerint őt terheli.

9. Cikk

1. A lízingbevevő a berendezést karbantartja, ésszerű módon használja, és azt az átvételkori állapotban megőrzi, figyelembe véve a rendes elhasználódást és a felek megállapodásának megfelelő, a berendezésen végrehajtott változtatásokat.

2. A lízingszerződés megszűnésekor a lízingbevevő, amennyiben nem gyakorolja a berendezés megvásárlására való jogát, vagy a szerződést nem hosszabbítja meg további időszakra, köteles a berendezést a lízingbeadónak az 1. pontban meghatározott állapotban visszaszolgáltatni.

10. Cikk

1. A lízingbevevő ugyanúgy hivatkozhat a szállítónak az adásvételi szerződésen alapuló kötelezettségeire, mintha ő maga is részese lenne az adásvételi szerződésnek és a berendezést közvetlenül neki adnák el. Ezért a lízingbeadó és a lízingbevevő jogosultsága a szállító kártérítési felelőssége esetén együttes.

2. Jelen Cikk rendelkezései nem jogosítják fel a lízingbevevőt arra, hogy a lízingbeadó beleegyezése nélkül felmondja vagy érvénytelenítse az adásvételi szerződést.

11. Cikk

A lízingbevevőnek az Egyezmény szerinti, az adásvételi szerződésen alapuló jogait nem érinti az általa előzetesen elfogadott adásvételi szerződés bármely rendelkezésének módosítása, ha ahhoz nem járult hozzá.

12. Cikk

1. Ha a berendezést nem szállítják, illetve a szállító késedelembe esik, vagy a berendezés az adásvételi szerződésben foglaltaknak nem felel meg, akkor

a) a lízingbevevő jogosult a lízingbeadóval szemben a berendezés átvételét megtagadni, vagy a lízing szerződést felmondani, és

b) a lízingbeadó jogosult a hibás teljesítés orvoslására és a szerződésnek megfelelő berendezés felajánlására úgy, mintha a lízingbevevő a berendezést a lízingbeadótól az adásvételi szerződésben foglalt feltételek szerint megvásárolta volna.

2. Bármely, az 1. ponton alapuló jog ugyanúgy gyakorolható, illetve ugyanolyan feltételek mellett szűnik meg, mintha a lízingbevevő a berendezést a lízingbeadótól az adásvételi szerződésben foglalt feltételek szerint megvásárolta volna.

3. A lízingbevevő jogosult a lízing szerződés alapján fizetendő bért mindaddig visszatartani, amíg a lízingbeadó nem orvosolja a mulasztását azzal, hogy az adásvételi szerződésnek megfelelő berendezést ajánl fel, illetve amíg a lízingbevevőnek a berendezés átvételének megtagadásához való joga meg nem szűnik.

4. Ha a lízingbevevő élt a lízing szerződéstől való elállási jogával, úgy jogosult az előre kifizetett bért és minden egyéb kifizetést visszakövetelni, levonva abból egy ésszerű összeget a berendezés által biztosított előnyök címén.

5. A lízingbevevőnek a lízingbeadóval szemben a berendezés szállításának elmulasztása vagy késedelmes szállítása, vagy nem megfelelő berendezés szállítása címén egyéb igénye nem lehet, kivéve ha az a lízingbeadó tevékenységére vagy mulasztására vezethető vissza.

6. Jelen cikk rendelkezései nem érintik a lízingbevevőnek a szállítóval szembeni, a 10. Cikken alapuló jogait.

13. Cikk

1. A lízingbevevő mulasztása esetén a lízingbeadó követelheti a hátralékos bért, annak kamatait és kártérítést.

2. Ha a lízingbevevő mulasztása súlyos szerződésszegésnek minősül, úgy a lízingbeadó az 5. pontban foglaltak szerint, amennyiben a lízing szerződés így rendelkezik, a jövőben esedékessé váló részleteket is lejárttá teheti és azt követelheti, illetve elállhat a lízing szerződéstől és az elállást követően

a) ismét birtokba veheti a berendezést, és

b) olyan mértékű kártérítést követelhet, amely abba a helyzetbe hozza, amelyben akkor volna, ha a lízingbevevő a lízing szerződést szerződésszerűen teljesíti.

3. a) A lízing szerződés előírhatja, hogy a 2. b) pont szerint igényelhető kártérítés összegét miként kell kiszámítani.

b) Az a) pont szerinti rendelkezés a felek között csak akkor érvényes, ha az nem eredményez a 2. b) pontban meghatározott kár összegét lényegesen meghaladó kártérítést. Jelen pont rendelkezéseit a felek nem zárhatják ki és nem térhetnek el azoktól.

4. Ha a lízingbeadó eláll a lízing szerződéstől, a jövőben fizetendő bért nem teheti lejárttá, de ezt a bérhátralékot figyelembe veheti a kártérítés összegének a 2. b) és a 3. pontok szerinti számítása alkalmával. Jelen pont rendelkezéseit a felek nem zárhatják ki és nem térhetnek el azoktól.

5. A lízingbeadó a jövőben esedékessé váló bért csak akkor teheti lejárttá, vagy elállási jogát a 2. pont szerint csak akkor gyakorolhatja, ha előzőleg felszólította a lízingbevevőt, és ésszerű lehetőséget kínált fel neki a mulasztás pótlására, amennyiben az lehetséges.

6. A lízingbeadó nem követelheti kárának a megtérítését, amennyiben elmulasztotta mindazon ésszerű intézkedésnek a megtételét, amelyek kárát enyhítették volna.

14. Cikk

1. A lízingbeadó a berendezésre vonatkozó, illetőleg a lízing szerződésen alapuló minden jogát vagy azok bármelyikét átruházhatja, vagy azokról egyéb módon rendelkezhet. Ez az átruházás azonban nem mentesíti a lízingbeadót a lízing szerződésen alapuló kötelezettségei alól, és nem módosíthatja a lízing szerződés jellegét, és azt az Egyezmény hatálya alól nem vonhatja ki.

2. A lízingbevevő a berendezés használatához való, vagy bármely egyéb, a lízing szerződésen alapuló jogát csak a lízingbeadó hozzájárulásával, valamint harmadik személyek jogainak sérelme nélkül ruházhatja át.

III. Fejezet

-----STARTING---POINT---VEGE---

Záró rendelkezések

15. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény aláírásra nyitva áll az UNIDROIT-nak a nemzetközi követelés-vételi és a nemzetközi pénzügyi lízing szerződésre vonatkozó Egyezmény tervezeteinek az elfogadása céljából Ottawában tartott Diplomáciai Konferencia záró ülésén és azt követően is bármely Állam számára 1990. december 31-ig.

2. Az Egyezményt az aláíró Államoknak ratifikálniuk, elfogadniuk vagy jóváhagyniuk kell.

3. Az Egyezmény csatlakozás céljából bármely olyan Állam számára, amely nem aláírója annak, nyitva áll ugyanattól a naptól fogva, amelytől aláírásra nyitva áll.

4. A ratifikáció, elfogadás, jóváhagyás vagy csatlakozás az erről szóló valamely okiratnak a letéteményesnél történő letétbe helyezésével történik.

16. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény attól a naptól számított hat hónap elteltét követő hó első napján lép hatályba, amikor a harmadik ratifikációs, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási okmányt letétbe helyezték.

2. Minden olyan Állam tekintetében, amely ezt az Egyezményt a harmadik ratifikációs, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási okmány letétbe helyezését követően ratifikálja, elfogadja vagy hagyja jóvá, illetőleg ahhoz azt követően csatlakozik, az Egyezmény attól a naptól számított hat hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján lép hatályba, amikor ez az Állam a saját ratifikációs, elfogadási, jóváhagyási avagy csatlakozási okmányát letétbe helyezte.

17. Cikk

Az Egyezmény nem érinti a már hatályba lépett vagy a jövőben hatályba lépő nemzetközi szerződések hatályát, különösen nem befolyásolja a már megkötött vagy a jövőben megkötendő nemzetközi szerződésekben bárki terhére megállapított kötelezettségeket.

18. Cikk

1. Ha valamely Szerződő Államnak két vagy több olyan területi egysége van, amelyekben a jelen Egyezményben szabályozott kérdések vonatkozásában eltérő rendelkezések vannak hatályban, úgy ez a Szerződő Állam az aláírás, ratifikálás, elfogadás, jóváhagyás vagy csatlakozás alkalmával kijelentheti, hogy az Egyezmény hatálya valamennyi területi egységre, vagy azok közül csak egyre vagy többre terjed ki, és ezt a nyilatkozatát bármikor másikkal válthatja fel.

2. Ezeket a nyilatkozatokat a letéteményeshez kell eljuttatni, és azokban kifejezetten meg kell jelölni azokat a területi egységeket, amelyekre az Egyezmény hatálya kiterjed.

3. Ha a jelen cikk alapján tett nyilatkozat értelmében az Egyezmény hatálya valamely Szerződő Állam egy vagy több, de nem valamennyi területi egységére terjed ki, és ha valamely fél székhelye ebben az Államban van, úgy ez a székhely az Egyezmény szempontjából úgy tekintendő, mint amely nincs olyan területi egységben, amelyre az Egyezmény hatálya kiterjed.

4. Ha valamely Szerződő Állam nem tesz 1. pont szerinti nyilatkozatot, úgy az Egyezmény hatálya annak valamennyi területi egységére kiterjed.

19. Cikk

1. Két vagy több olyan Szerződő Állam, amelyben az Egyezmény által szabályozott kérdések tekintetében azonos vagy nagymértékben hasonló rendelkezések vannak hatályban, bármikor kijelentheti, hogy az Egyezmény nem alkalmazható, ha a szállító, a lízingbeadó és a lízingbevevő székhelye ezekben az Államokban van. Ilyen nyilatkozatot az Államok együttesen, vagy kölcsönösen egyoldalúan tehetnek.

2. Az a Szerződő Állam, amelyben az Egyezmény által szabályozott kérdések tekintetében azonos vagy nagymértékben hasonló jogszabályok vannak hatályban, mint egy vagy több nem Szerződő Államban, bármikor kijelentheti, hogy az Egyezmény nem alkalmazható, ha a szállító, a lízingbeadó és a lízingbevevő székhelye ezekben az Államokban van.

3. Ha valamely olyan Állam, amelynek tekintetében a 2. pont szerinti nyilatkozatot tettek, utóbb Szerződő Állammá lesz, az említett nyilatkozat attól a naptól fogva, amelyen az Egyezmény az új Szerződő Államra vonatkozólag hatályba lép, az 1. pont szerint közölt nyilatkozatnak tekintendő, feltéve, hogy az új Szerződő Állam csatlakozik a nyilatkozathoz, vagy kölcsönösen egyoldalú nyilatkozatot tesz.

20. Cikk

Az aláírás, ratifikálás, elfogadás, jóváhagyás vagy csatlakozás alkalmával bármely Szerződő Állam kijelentheti, hogy a 8. Cikk 3. pontja helyett saját hazai jogát fogja alkalmazni, feltéve, hogy hazai joga nem engedi meg a lízingbeadónak, hogy a saját mulasztása vagy gondatlansága miatti felelősségét kizárhassa.

21. Cikk

1. Az Egyezmény alapján annak aláírásakor tett nyilatkozatokat a ratifikálás, elfogadás vagy jóváhagyás alkalmával meg kell erősíteni.

2. A nyilatkozatokat és a nyilatkozatok megerősítését írásba kell foglalni, és az alakiságok betartásával a letéteményessel közölni kell.

3. A nyilatkozat azzal egyidejűleg válik hatályossá, hogy az Egyezmény az érintett Állam tekintetében hatályba lép. Az a nyilatkozat azonban, amelyre nézve a letéteményes az említett hatálybalépést követően kap az alakiságoknak megfelelő értesítést, attól a naptól számított hat hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá, amelyen az értesítés a letéteményeshez beérkezett. A 19. Cikk szerinti kölcsönösen egyoldalú nyilatkozat attól a naptól számított hat hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá, amikor a letéteményes az utolsó nyilatkozatot kézhez vette.

4. Az az Állam, amely az Egyezmény szerinti nyilatkozatot tett, azt bármikor visszavonhatja a letéteményeshez intézett, az alakiságoknak megfelelő írásos értesítéssel. Ez a visszavonás attól a naptól számított hat hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá, amelyen a letéteményes az értesítést kézhez vette.

5. A 19. Cikk alapján tett nyilatkozat visszavonása az adott Állam tekintetében a visszavonás érvényessé válásának napjával megszünteti a valamely másik Állam által ugyanazon cikk alapján tett bármely együttes vagy kölcsönösen egyoldalú nyilatkozat hatályát.

22. Cikk

Az Egyezmény által kifejezetten megengedett fenntartásokon kívül egyéb fenntartásnak nincs helye.

23. Cikk

Az Egyezmény az olyan nemzetközi pénzügyi lízing ügyletre alkalmazandó, amely esetben mind a lízingszerződést, mind az adásvételi szerződést azon a napon vagy azt követően kötik, hogy az Egyezmény a 3. Cikk 1. a) pont szerinti Szerződő Államokra, illetőleg az ugyanazon cikk 1. b) pontja szerinti Szerződő Államra vagy Államokra nézve hatályba lép.

24. Cikk

1. Az Egyezményt bármely Szerződő Állam azt követően, hogy az az ő vonatkozásában hatályba lépett, bármikor felmondhatja.

2. A felmondás ilyen értelmű okiratnak a letéteményesnél való elhelyezésével történik.

3. A felmondás attól a naptól számított hat hónap elteltét követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá, amelyen az erről szóló okiratot a letéteményesnél letétbe helyezték. Ha a felmondásról szóló értesítésben a hatályossá válásra hosszabb határidőt állapítanak meg, úgy a felmondás az értesítésnek a letéteményesnél való letétbe helyezésétől számított e hosszabb határidő elteltével válik hatályossá.

25. Cikk

1. Az Egyezményt Kanada Kormányánál helyezik letétbe.

2. Kanada Kormánya

a) értesíti valamennyi aláíró vagy csatlakozó Államot és a Nemzetközi Magánjog-egységesítési Intézet (UNIDROIT) elnökét;

(i) az új aláírásokról, illetőleg minden ratifikációs, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási nyilatkozat letétbe helyezéséről, közölve egyben ezek időpontját is;

(ii) a 18., 19. és 20. Cikk alapján tett nyilatkozatokról;

(iii) a 21. Cikk 4. pontja alapján tett nyilatkozat visszavonásáról;

(iv) az Egyezmény hatálybalépésének időpontjáról;

(v) az Egyezmény felmondásáról szóló okirat letétbe helyezéséről, a letétbe helyezés és a hatálybalépés napjának egyidejű közlésével,

b) megküldi az Egyezmény hiteles másolatát valamennyi aláíró Államnak, valamennyi csatlakozott Államnak, továbbá a Nemzetközi Magánjog-egységesítési Intézet (UNIDROIT) elnökének.

A fentiek hiteléül az alulírott meghatalmazottak, Kormányaik szabályszerű meghatalmazásának birtokában, az Egyezményt aláírták.

Kelt Ottawában, ezerkilencszáznyolcvannyolc május huszonnyolcadikán, egyetlen eredeti példányban, amelynek angol és francia nyelvű szövege egyaránt hiteles.”

3. § A törvény a kihirdetését követő 15. napon lép hatályba, rendelkezéseit azonban 1996. december 1-jétől kell alkalmazni.