1997. évi XV. törvény

a Helyi Önkormányzatok Európai Chartájáról szóló, 1985. október 15-én, Strasbourgban kelt egyezmény kihirdetéséről

(A Magyar Köztársaság megerősítésről szóló okiratának letétbe helyezése az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál 1994. március 21. napján megtörtént.)

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés a Helyi Önkormányzatok Európai Chartájáról szóló, Strasbourgban, 1985. október 15-én kelt egyezményt e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

2. § Az egyezmény eredeti angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„EUROPEAN CHARTER OF LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

Preamble

The member States of the Council of Europe, signatory hereto,

Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage;

Considering that one of the methods by which this aim is to be achieved is through agreements in the administrative field;

Considering that the local authorities are one of the main foundations of any democratic regime;

Considering that the right of citizens to participate in the conduct of public affairs is one of the democratic principles that are shared by all member States of the Council of Europe;

Considering that it is at local level that this right can be most directly exercised;

Convinced that the existence of local authorities with real responsibilities can provide an administration which is both effective and close to the citizen;

Aware that the safeguarding and reinforcement of local self-government in the different European countries is an important contribution to the construction of a Europe based on the principles of democracy and the decentralisation of power;

Asserting that this entails the existence of local authorities endowed with democratically constituted decision-making bodies and possessing a wide degree of autonomy with regard to their responsibilities, the ways and means by which those responsibilities are exercised and the resources required for their fulfilment,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

The Parties undertake to consider themselves bound by the following articles in the manner and to the extent prescribed in Article 12 of this Charter.

PART I

Article 2

Constitutional and legal foundation for local self-government

The principle of local self-government shall be recognised in domestic legislation, and where practicable in the constitution.

Article 3

Concept of local self-government

(1) Local self-government denotes the right and the abilitv of local authorities, within the limits of the law, to regulate and manage a substantial share of public affairs under their own responsibility and in the interests of the local population.

(2) This right shall be exercised by councils or assemblies composed of members freely elected by secret ballot on the basis of direct, equal, universal suffrage, and which may possess executive organs responsible to them. This provision shall in no way affect recourse to assemblies of citizens, referendums or any other form of direct citizen participation where it is permitted by statute.

Article 4

Scope of local self-government

(1) The basic powers and responsibilities of local authorities shall be prescribed by the constitution or by statute. However, this provision shall not prevent the attribution to local authorities of powers and responsibilities for specific purposes in accordance with the law.

(2) Local authorities shall, within the limits of the law, have full discretion to exercise their initiative with regard to any matter which is not excluded from their competence nor assigned to any other authority.

(3) Public responsibilities shall generally be exercised, in preference, by those authorities which are closest to the citizen. Allocation of responsibility to another authority should weigh up the extent and nature of the task and requirements of efficiency and economy.

(4) Powers given to local authorities shall normally be full and exclusive. They may not be undermined or limited by another, central or regional, authority except as provided for by the law.

(5) Where powers are delegated to them by a central or regional authority, local authorities shall, insofar as possible, be allowed discretion in adapting their exercise to local conditions.

(6) Local authorities shall be consulted, insofar as possible, in due time and in an appropriate way in the planning and decision-making processes for all matters which concern them directly.

Article 5

Protection of local authority boundaries

Changes in local authority boundaries shall not be made without prior consultation of the local communities concerned, possibly by means of a referendum where this is permitted by statute.

Article 6

Appropriate administrative structures and resources for the tasks of local authorities

(1) Without prejudice to more general statutory provisions, local authorities shall be able to determine their own internal administrative structures in order to adapt them to local needs and ensure effective management.

(2) The conditions of service of local government employees shall be such as to permit the recruitment of high-quality staff on the basis of merit and competence; to this end adequate training opportunities, remuneration and career prospects shall be provided.

Article 7

Conditions under which responsibilities at local level are exercised

(1) The conditions of office of local elected representatives shall provide for free exercise of their functions.

(2) They shall allow for appropriate financial compensation for expenses incurred in the exercise of the office in question as well as, where appropriate, compensation for loss of earnings or remuneration for work done and corresponding social welfare protection.

(3) Any functions and activities which are deemed incompatible with the holding of local elective office shall be determined by statute or fundamental legal principles.

Article 8

Administrative supervision of local authorities’ activities

(1) Any administrative supervision of local authorities may only be exercised according to such procedures and in such cases as are provided for by the constitution or by statute.

(2) Any administrative supervision of the activities of the local autorities shall normally aim only at ensuring compliance with the law and with constitutional principles. Administrative supervision may however be exercised with regard to expediency by higher-level authorities in respect of tasks the execution of which is delegated to local authorities.

(3) Administrative supervision of local authorities shall be exercised in such a way as to ensure that the intervention of the controlling authority is kept in proportion to the importance of the interests which it is intended to protect.

Article 9

Financial resources of local authorities

(1) Local authorities shall be entitled, within national economic policy, to adequate financial resources of their own, of which they may dispose freely within the framework of their powers.

 (2) Local authorities’ financial resources shall be commensurate with the responsibilities provided for by the constitution and the law.

(3) Part at least of the financial resources of local authorities shall derive from local taxes and charges of which, within the limits of statute, they have the power to determine the rate.

(4) The financial systems on which resources available to local authorities are based shall be of a sufficiently diversified and buoyant nature to enable them to keep pace as far as practically possible with the real evolution of the cost of carrying out their tasks.

(5) The protection of financially weaker local authorities calls for the institution of financial equalisation procedures or equivalent measures which are designed to correct the effects of the unequal distribution of potential sources of finance and of the financial burden they must support. Such procedures or measures shall not diminish the discretion local authorities may exercise within their own sphere of responsibility.

(6) Local authorities shall be consulted, in an appropriate manner, on the way in which redistributed resources are to be allocated to them.

(7) As far as possible, grants to local authorities shall not be earmarked for the financing of specific projects. The provision of grants shall not remove the basic freedom of local authorities to exercise policy discretion within their own jurisdiction.

(8) For the purpose of borrowing for capital investment, local authorities shall have access to the national capital market within the lirnits of the law.

Article 10

Local authorities’ right to associate

(1) Local authorities shall be entitled, in exercising their powers, to co-operate and, within the framework of the law, to form consortia with other local authorities in order to carry out tasks of common interest.

(2) The entitlement of local authorities to belong to an association for the protection and promotion of their common interests and to belong to an international association of local authorities shall be recognised in each State.

(3) Local authorities shall be entitled, under such conditions as may be provided for by the law, to co-operate with their counterparts in other States.

Article 11

Legal protection of local self-government

Local authorities shall have the right of recourse to a judicial remedy in order to secure free exercise of their powers and respect for such principles of local self-government as are enshrined in the constitution or domestic legislation.

PART II

Miscellaneous provisions

Article 12

Undertakings

(1) Each Party undertakes to consider itself bound by at least twenty paragraphs of Part I of the Charter, at least ten of which shall be selected from among the following paragraphs:

- Article 2,

- Article 3, paragraphs 1 and 2,

- Article 4, paragraphs 1, 2 and 4,

- Article 5,

- Article 7, paragraph l,

- Article 8, paragraph 2,

- Article 9, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3;

- Article 10, paragraph 1,

- Article 11.

(2) Each Contracting State, when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, shall notify to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of the paragraphs selected in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article.

(3) Any Party may, at any later time, notify the Secretary General that it considers itself bound by any paragraphs of this Charter which it has not already accepted under the terms of paragraph 1 of this Article. Such undertakings subsequently given shall be deemed to be an integral part of the ratification, acceptance or approval of the Party so notifying, and shall have the same effect as from the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the receipt of the notification by the Secretary General.

Article 13

Authorities to which the Charter applies

The principles of local self-government contained in the present Charter apply to all the categories of local authorities existing within the territory of the Party. However, each Party may, when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the categories of local or regional authorities to which it intends to confine the scope of the Charter or which it intends to exclude from its scope. It may also include further categories of local or regional authorities within the scope of the Charter by subsequent notification to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

Article 14

Provision of information

Each Party shall forward to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe all relevant information concerning legislative provisions and other measures taken by it for the purposes of complying with the terms of this Charter.

PART III

Article 15

Signature, ratification and entry into force

(1) This Charter shall be open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

(2) This Charter shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which four member States of the Council of Europe have expressed their consent to be bound by the Charter in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

(3) In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Charter shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.

Article 16

Territorial clause

(1) Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, specify the territory or territories to which this Charter shall apply.

(2) Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the application of this Charter to any other territory specified in the declaration. In respect of such territory the Charter shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such declaration by the Secretary General.

(3) Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification addressed to the Secretary General. The withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of six months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.

Article 17

Denunciation

(1) Any Party may denounce this Charter at any time after the expiration of a period of five years from the date on which the Charter entered into force for it. Six months' notice shall be given to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. Such denunciation shall not affect the validity of the Charter in respect of the other Parties provided that at all times there are not less than four such Parties.

(2) Any Party may, in accordance with the provisions set out in the preceding paragraph, denounce any paragraph of Part I of the Charter accepted by it provided that the Party remains bound by the number and type of paragraphs stipulated in Article 12, paragraph 1. Any Party which, upon denouncing a paragraph, no longer meets the requirements of Article 12, paragraph 1, shall be considered as also having denounced the Charter itself.

Article 18

Notifications

The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of Europe of:

a) any signature;

b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval;

c) any date of entry into force of this Charter in accordance with Article 15;

d) any notitication received in application of the provisions of Article 12, paragraphs 2 and 3;

e) any notification received in. application of the provisions of Article 13;

f) any other act, notification or communication relating to this Charter.

In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Charter.

Done at Strasbourg, this 15th day of October 1985, in English and French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe.

HELYI ÖNKORMÁNYZATOK EURÓPAI CHARTÁJA

Preambulum

Az Európa Tanácsnak a jelen Chartát aláíró tagállamai

figyelembe véve azt, hogy az Európa Tanács célja a tagjai közötti szorosabb egység létrehozása, a közös örökségüket képező eszmék és elvek védelmének és megvalósításának érdekében,

figyelembe véve azt, hogy e cél elérésének egyik eszköze a közigazgatás terén történő megállapodás,

figyelembe véve azt, hogy a helyi önkormányzatok minden demokratikus rendszer egyik alapintézményét képezik,

figyelembe véve azt, hogy az állampolgárok közügyekben való részvételének joga egyike az Európa Tanács valamennyi tagállama által elfogadott demokratikus elveknek,

meggyőződve arról, hogy e jog legközvetlenebbül helyi szinten gyakorolható,

meggyőződve arról, hogy csak tényleges feladatkörrel bíró helyi önkormányzatok biztosíthatnak egyszerre hatékony és az állampolgárokhoz közelálló igazgatást,

tudatában annak, hogy a helyi önkormányzás védelme és megerősítése a különböző európai országokban fontos hozzájárulás a demokráciának és a hatalom decentralizálásának elvein alapuló Európa kialakításához,

megerősítve azt, hogy mindez feltételezi olyan helyi önkormányzatok létezését, amelyeknek részét képezik a demokratikusan létrehozott döntéshozó szervek, és amelyek feladatainak és e feladatok gyakorlása módjának és eszközeinek, valamint mindezek megvalósításához szükséges forrásoknak a tekintetében széles körű autonómiával rendelkeznek,

a következőkben állapodtak meg:

1. Cikk

A Felek a következő Cikkeket a Charta 12. Cikkében foglalt módon és mértékig magukra nézve kötelezőnek ismerik el.

I. RÉSZ

2. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzás alkotmányos és jogi megalapozása

A helyi önkormányzás elvét a belső jogalkotásban, és amennyire lehetséges, az Alkotmányban is el kell ismerni.

3. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzás fogalma

1. A helyi önkormányzás a helyi önkormányzatoknak azt a jogát és képességét jelenti, hogy - jogszabályi keretek között - a közügyek lényegi részét saját hatáskörükben szabályozzák és igazgassák a helyi lakosság érdekében.

2. E jogot olyan tanácsok vagy testületek gyakorolják, amelyeknek tagjait egyenlő, közvetlen és általános választójogon alapuló szabad és titkos szavazással választják, és amelyek nekik felelős végrehajtó szervekkel is rendelkezhetnek. E rendelkezés semmilyen módon nem érinti az állampolgári gyűléseknek, a népszavazásnak vagy a közvetlen állampolgári részvétel egyéb formájának igénybe vételét ott, ahol azt jogszabály megengedi.

4. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzás terjedelme

1. A helyi önkormányzatok alapvető hatáskörét és feladatait az Alkotmány vagy törvény rendezi. Azonban ez a rendelkezés nem akadályozhatja azt, hogy - jogszabályi keretek között - a helyi önkormányzatokat speciális célból hatás- és feladatkörrel ruházzák fel.

2. A helyi önkormányzatok - jogszabályi keretek között - teljes döntési jogosultsággal rendelkeznek minden olyan ügyben, amely nincs kivonva hatáskörükből és bármely más közigazgatási szerv hatáskörébe sincs utalva.

3. A közfeladatokat általában elsősorban az állampolgárokhoz legközelebb álló közigazgatási szervnek kell megvalósítania. A feladatoknak más közigazgatási szervre történő átruházása a feladat természetétől és nagyságától, valamint hatékonysági és gazdaságossági követelményektől függ.

4. A helyi önkormányzatok hatásköre általában teljes és kizárólagos. Ezt más központi vagy regionális közigazgatási szerv nem vonhatja el, és nem korlátozhatja, kivéve, ha ezt törvény lehetővé teszi.

5. Ha a helyi önkormányzatokra központi vagy regionális közigazgatási szerv hatáskört ruház át, a helyi önkormányzatok az átruházott hatáskört - amennyiben lehetséges - a helyi körülményekhez igazítva gyakorolhatják.

6. Lehetőség szerint a tervezési és döntéshozatali eljárás során, megfelelő időben és formában, ki kell kérni minden olyan ügyben a helyi önkormányzat véleményét, amely őket közvetlenül érinti.

5. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzat határainak védelme

Nem lehet megváltoztatni a helyi önkormányzatok határait az érintett közösségekkel való előzetes konzultáció, vagy ahol ezt törvény lehetővé teszi, esetleges helyi népszavazás nélkül.

6. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzatok feladatainak megfelelő igazgatási szervezetek és források

1. A helyi önkormányzatok - anélkül, hogy ez törvény általánosabb rendelkezését sértené - a helyi szükségletekhez való alkalmazkodás és a hatékonyabb igazgatás érdekében maguk határozhatják meg belső igazgatási felépítésüket.

2. A helyi önkormányzatoknál az alkalmazási feltételeknek olyanoknak kell lenniük, hogy lehetővé tegyék magasan képzett személyi állománynak a teljesítmény és a szakértelem alapján történő alkalmazását. E célból megfelelő képzési lehetőségeket, díjazást és előléptetési rendszert kell kialakítani.

7. Cikk

A helyi feladatok gyakorlásának feltételei

1. A választott helyi képviselők hivatali körülményeinek biztosítania kell feladataik szabad gyakorlását.

2. A választott helyi képviselők jogosultak a hivataluk gyakorlása közben felmerült kiadásoknak megfelelő anyagi ellenszolgáltatásra, és ahol ez felmerülhet, a jövedelemkiesés és az elvégzett munka megtérítésére, valamint megfelelő szociális juttatásokra.

3. Az olyan tisztségeket vagy tevékenységeket, amelyek összeférhetetlenek a választott helyi tisztség viselésével, törvénynek vagy alapvető jogelvnek kell meghatároznia.

8. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzatok tevékenységének államigazgatási felügyelete

1. A helyi önkormányzatok államigazgatási felügyeletét csak az Alkotmányban vagy törvényben meghatározott esetekben és eljárás szerint lehet gyakorolni.

2. A helyi önkormányzat tevékenységének államigazgatási felügyelete általában csak e tevékenység törvényességének és az alkotmányos elvekkel való összhangjának vizsgálatára irányulhat. Mindazonáltal magasabb szintű államigazgatási szervek célszerűségi felügyeletet gyakorolhatnak azon feladatok vonatkozásában, amelyeknek végrehajtását a helyi önkormányzatokra ruházták át.

3. A helyi önkormányzatok államigazgatási felügyeletét olyan módon kell gyakorolni, hogy a felügyeletet gyakorló szerv beavatkozása arányban legyen a védeni szándékozott érdekek fontosságával.

9. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzatok pénzügyi forrásai

1. A helyi önkormányzatok a nemzeti gazdaságpolitika keretein belül megfelelő saját pénzügyi forrásokra jogosultak, amelyekkel hatáskörük keretein belül szabadon rendelkeznek.

2. A helyi önkormányzat pénzügyi forrásainak az Alkotmányban és jogszabályokban meghatározott feladataikkal arányban kell állnia.

3. A helyi önkormányzatok pénzügyi forrásainak legalább egy részét olyan helyi adók és díjbevételek teszik ki, amelyek mértékének meghatározására - jogszabályi keretek között - e szerveknek van hatáskörük.

4. Azon pénzügyi rendszerek, amelyeken a helyi önkormányzatok pénzügyi forrásai alapulnak, legyenek eléggé sokrétűek és rugalmasak ahhoz, hogy lehetővé tegyék - amennyiben ez a gyakorlatban lehetséges - a feladatok megvalósításához szükséges költségek tényleges alakulásával való lépéstartást.

5. A pénzügyileg gyengébb helyi önkormányzatok védelme szükségessé teszi olyan pénzügyi kiegyenlítési eljárások, illetőleg ezekkel egyenértékű intézkedések intézményesítését, amelyek célja a számításba jövő pénzügyi források egyenlőtlen elosztása, valamint a teljesítendő pénzügyi terhek által okozott hatások korrekciója.

Az ilyen eljárások, intézkedések nem csökkenthetik a helyi önkormányzatoknak a saját feladatkörüket illető döntési szabadságát.

6. A források rájuk eső részének meghatározása során megfelelő formában ki kell kérni a helyi önkormányzatok véleményét.

7. A lehetőségekhez mérten a helyi önkormányzatoknak juttatott támogatás nem köthető meghatározott feladatok finanszírozásához. A támogatások juttatása nem korlátozhatja a helyi önkormányzatoknak a hatáskörükön belüli önálló döntéshozatali jogát.

8. A beruházási célú hitelfelvétel érdekében a helyi önkormányzatok a jogszabályi kereteken belül jogosultak a nemzeti tőkepiacon megjelenni.

10. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzat egyesülési joga

1. A helyi önkormányzatok jogosultak arra, hogy hatáskörük gyakorlása körében közös érdekeltségű feladatok megoldása érdekében együttműködjenek, és törvényi keretek között más helyi önkormányzatokkal társulást hozzanak létre.

2. Mindegyik Állam elismeri a helyi önkormányzatoknak azt a jogát, hogy közös érdekeik védelmére és előmozdítására alakult szövetségnek, illetve a helyi önkormányzatok nemzetközi szövetségének tagjai legyenek.

3. A helyi önkormányzatok - törvény által előírt feltételekkel - jogosultak együttműködni más államokban működő önkormányzatokkal.

11. Cikk

A helyi önkormányzás jogi védelme

A helyi önkormányzatok jogosultak jogorvoslatot igénybe venni hatáskörük szabad gyakorlása és az önkormányzás olyan elveinek tiszteletben tartása érdekében, amelyet az Alkotmány vagy belső törvényhozás szentesít.

II. RÉSZ

VEGYES RENDELKEZÉSEK

12. Cikk

Kötelezettségvállalások

1. Mindegyik Szerződő Fél a Charta első részéből magára nézve legalább húsz szakaszt kötelezőnek ismer el, amelyek közül tízet a következő Cikkekből kell kiválasztani:

- 2. Cikk,

- 3. Cikk 1. és 2. szakasz,

- 4. Cikk 1., 2. és 4. szakasz,

- 5. Cikk,

- 7. Cikk 1. szakasz,

- 8. Cikk 2. szakasz,

- 9. Cikk 1., 2. és 3. szakasz

- 10. Cikk 1. szakasz,

- 11. Cikk.

2. Mindegyik Szerződő Állam a megerősítő, elfogadó vagy jóváhagyó okirat letétbe helyezésekor közli az Európa Tanács főtitkárával az e Cikk első szakaszának megfelelően kiválasztott szakaszokat.

3. Bármely Szerződő Fél később bármikor értesítheti a főtitkárt arról, hogy bármely olyan szakaszt magára nézve kötelezőnek ismer el, amelyet e Cikk első szakasza alapján addig még nem fogadott el. Az ilyen későbbi kötelezettségvállalást a bejelentést tevő Fél megerősítő, elfogadó vagy jóváhagyó okirata szerves részének kell tekinteni, és az értesítésnek a főtitkár által történt kézhezvételétől számított három hónapos időtartam lejártát követő hónap első napján lép hatályba.

13. Cikk

A Charta hatálya alá tartozó szervek

A jelen Chartában lefektetett önkormányzati elvek a Szerződő Felek területén található helyi önkormányzatok valamennyi típusára alkalmazandók. Azonban bármely Szerződő Fél a megerősítő, elfogadó vagy jóváhagyó okirat letétbe helyezésekor megjelölheti azon helyi és területi szervek kategóriáit, amelyekre ezt a Chartát alkalmazni kívánja, illetve amelyeket kivon a Charta hatálya alól. A feleknek a későbbiek során is lehetőségük van helyi vagy területi szervek újabb körének a Charta hatálya alá vonására az Európa Tanács főtitkárának utólagos értesítése útján.

14. Cikk

Információadási kötelezettség

Mindegyik Szerződő Fél megküld minden olyan szükséges információt az Európa Tanács főtitkárának, amely azon jogalkotói tevékenységre és egyéb intézkedésre vonatkozik, amelyeket ezen Charta előírásainak való megfelelés érdekében hoztak.

III. RÉSZ

15. Cikk

Aláírás, megerősítés és hatálybalépés

1. A jelen Charta az Európa Tanács tagállamai számára aláírásra nyitva áll; megerősítést, elfogadást vagy jóváhagyást igényel. A megerősítő, elfogadó vagy jóváhagyó okiratot az Európa Tanács főtitkáránál kell letétbe helyezni.

2. A Charta azt az időpontot követő három hónap eltelte utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba, amikor az Európa Tanács négy tagállama az előző szakasz rendelkezéseivel összhangban kinyilvánította azt, hogy a Chartát magára nézve kötelezőnek ismeri el.

3. Azon tagállamok vonatkozásában, amelyek később nyilvánították ki azt, hogy a Chartát magukra nézve kötelezőnek ismerik el, a Charta a megerősítő, elfogadó vagy csatlakozó okirat letétbe helyezésétől számított három hónap eltelte utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

16. Cikk

Területi záradék

1. Bármely állam az aláíráskor vagy a megerősítő, elfogadó vagy csatlakozó okirat letétbe helyezésekor meghatározhatja azt a területet vagy azokat a területeket, amelyekre nézve a jelen Charta alkalmazásra kerül.

2. Bármely állam a későbbiek során az Európa Tanács főtitkárához intézett nyilatkozattal kiterjesztheti a Charta területi hatályát a nyilatkozatban megjelölt bármely területre. Az ilyen területre nézve a Charta a nyilatkozatnak a főtitkár által történt kézhezvételét követő három hónapos időtartam utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

3. Az előző két szakasz alapján tett bármely nyilatkozatot, a benne meghatározott bármely terület tekintetében a főtitkárhoz intézett értesítésben vissza lehet vonni. A visszavonás az értesítésnek a főtitkár által történt kézhezvételét követő hat hónapos időtartam utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba.

17. Cikk

Felmondás

1. Bármely Szerződő Fél felmondhatja a Chartát, ha annak ránézve történt hatálybalépésétől legalább öt év eltelt.

A felmondási szándékról hat hónapos felmondási időtartam megadásával értesíteni kell az Európa Tanács főtitkárát. Az ilyen felmondás nem érinti a Charta hatályát a többi állam vonatkozásában, feltéve, hogy a Szerződő Felek száma nem csökken négy alá.

2. Bármely Fél az előző szakaszban foglalt rendelkezésekkel összhangban felmondhatja az I. rész általa korábban elfogadott bármely szakaszát, feltéve, hogy a 12. Cikk 1. szakaszában megjelölt szakaszok száma és fajtája továbbra is kötelező érvényű marad ránézve. Ha valamelyik Aláíró Fél egy szakasz felmondása következtében nem tesz eleget a 12. Cikk 1. szakaszában foglalt követelményeknek, akkor úgy kell tekinteni, mintha az egész Chartát mondta volna fel.

18. Cikk

Értesítések

Az Európa Tanács főtitkára értesíti a tagállamokat:

a) minden aláírásról,

b) minden megerősítő, elfogadó vagy jóváhagyó okirat letétbe helyezéséről,

c) minden, a Chartának a 15. Cikk alapján történt hatálybalépésének időpontjáról,

d) minden, a 12. Cikk 2. és 3. szakasza rendelkezéseinek alkalmazása ügyében hozzá érkezett értesítésről,

e) minden, a 1. Cikk alkalmazásával kapcsolatos értesítésről,

f) minden egyéb, a Chartával kapcsolatos intézkedésről vagy közlésről.

Fentiek hiteléül a kellően felhatalmazott alulírottak a Chartát aláírták.

Készült Strasbourgban, 1985. október 15-én egyaránt hiteles angol és francia nyelvű egyetlen eredeti példányban, amelyet az Európa Tanács irattárában helyeznek el. Az Európa Tanács főtitkára az Európa Tanács mindegyik tagállamának hitelesített másolatot küld.”

3. § (1) Ez a törvény a kihirdetését követő 30. napon lép hatályba, az egyezmény rendelkezéseit azonban 1994. július hó 1. napjától kezdődően kell alkalmazni.

(2) A törvény végrehajtásáról a belügyminiszter gondoskodik.