1991. évi LXXII. törvény

az Európa Tanács kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szóló, Párizsban, 1949. szeptember 2-án kelt és a Strasbourgban, 1952. november 6-án kelt Jegyzőkönyvvel kiegészített Általános Megállapodás kihirdetéséről

(A Magyar Köztársaság csatlakozási okiratának letétbe helyezése az Európa Tanács főtitkáránál 1990. november 6-án megtörtént.)

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés az Európa Tanács kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szóló, Párizsban, 1949. szeptember 2-án kelt és a Strasbourgban 1952. november 6-án kelt Jegyzőkönyvvel kiegészített Általános Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

2. § Az Általános Megállapodás és a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv eredeti angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar fordítása a következő:

General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of theCouncil of Europe

The Governments of the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of Denmark, the French Republic, the Kingdom of Greece, the Irish Republic, the Italian Republic, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of Sweden, the Turkish Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland;

Whereas under the provisions of Article 40, paragrapha)of the Statute of the Council of Europe, representatives of Members and the Secretariat shall enjoy in the territories of its Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the exercise of their duties;

Whereas under the provisions of paragraphb)of the above-mentioned Article, the Members of the Council have undertaken to enter into an agreement for the purpose of fulfilling the provisions of the said paragraph;

Whereas in pursuance of the above-mentioned paragraphb), the Committee of Ministers has recommended to Member Governments the acceptance of the following provisions,

Have agreed as follows:

Part I

Personality - Capacity

Article 1

The Council of Europe shall possess juridical personality. It shall have the capacity to conclude contracts, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property and to institute legal proceedings.

In these matters the Secretary-General shall act on behalf of the Council of Europe.

Article 2

The Secretary-General shall co-operate at all times with the competent authorities of the Members to facilitate the proper administration of justice, secure the observance of police regulations and prevent the occurrance of any abuse in connection with the privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities enumerated in the present Agreement.

Part II

Property, Funds and Assets

Article 3

The Council, its property and assets, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held, shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process except in so far as in any particular case, the Committee of Ministers has expressly authorized the waiver of this immunity. It is, however, understood that no waiver of immunity shall extend to any measure of execution or detention of property.

Article 4

The buildings and premises of the Council shall be inviolable. Its property and assets, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of interference whether by administrative, judicial or legislative action.

Article 5

The archives of the Council, and in general all documents belonging to it or held by it, shall be inviolable wheresoever located.

Article 6

Without being restricted by financial controls, regulations or financial moratoria of any kind:

a) the Council may hold currency of any kind and operate accounts in any currency;

b) the Council may freely transfer its funds from one country to another or within any country and convert any currency held by it into any other currency;

c) In exercising its rights under sub-paragraphs a) and b) above, the Council of Europe shall pay due regard to any representations made by the Government of a Member and shall defer to such representations in so far as it considers this can be done without detriment to the interests of the Council.

Article 7

The Council, its assest, income and other property shall be exempt:

a) from all direct taxes; the Council will not, however, claim exemption from rates, taxes or duties which are no more than charges for public utility services;

b) from all customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of articles, required by the Council for its official use; articles imported under such exemptions will not be sold in the country into which they are imported, except under conditions approved by the Government of the country;

c) from all customs duties, and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of its publications.

Part III

Communications

Article 8

The Committee of Ministers and the Secretary-General shall enjoy in the territory of each Members, for their official communications, treatment at least as favourable as that accorded by that Member to the diplomatic missions of any other Government.

No censorship shall be applied to the official correspondence and other official communications of the Committee of Ministers and of the Secretariat.

Part IV

Representatives of Members to the Committee of Ministers

Article 9

Representatives at the Committee of Ministers shall, while exercising their functions and during their journeys to and from the place of meeting, enjoy the following privileges and immunities:

a) Immunity from personal arrest or detention and from seizure of their personal baggage, and, in respect of words spoken or written and all acts done by them in their official capacity, immunity from legal process of every kind.

b) Inviolability for all papers and documents.

c) The right to use codes and to receive papers or correspondence by courier or in sealed bags.

d) Exemption in respect of themselves and their spouses from immigration restrictions or aliens registration in the State which they are visiting or through which they are passing in the exercise of their functions.

e) The same facilities in respect of currency or exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of comparable rank of diplomatic missions.

f) The same immunities and facilities in respect of their personal baggage as are accorded to members of comparable rank of diplomatic missions.

Article 10

In order to secure for the representatives at the Committee of Ministers complete freedom of speech and complete independence in the discharge of their duties, the immunity from legal process in respect of words spoken or written and all acts done by them in discharging their duties shall continue to be accorded, notwithstanding that the persons concerned are no longer engaged in the discharge of such duties.

Article 11

Privileges and immunities are accorded to the representatives of Members, not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves, but in order to safeguard the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Committee of Ministers. Consequently, a Member not only has the right but is under a duty to waive the immunity of its representative in any case where, in the opinion of the Member, the immunity would impede the course of justice, and where it can be waived without prejudice to the purpose for which the immunity is accorded.

Article 12

a) The provisions of articles 9, 10 and 11 are not applicable in relations to the authorities of a State of which the person is a national or of which he is or has been a representative.

b) In articles 9, 10, 11 and 12 a) above, the expression „representatives” shall be deemed to include all representatives, alternate representatives, advisers, technical experts and secretaries of delegations.

Part V

Representatives to the Consultative Assembly

Article 13

No administrative or other restriction shall be imposed on the free movement to and from the place of meeting of Representatives to the Consultative Assembly and their substitutes.

Representatives and their substitutes shall, in the matter of customs and exchange control, be accorded:

a) by their own Government, the same facilities as those accorded to senior officials travelling abroad on temporary official duty;

b) by the Governments of other Members, the same facilities as those accorded to representatives of foreign Governments on temporary official duty.

Article 14

Representatives to the Consultative Assembly and their substitutes shall be immune from all official interrogation and from arrest and all legal proceedings in respect of words spoken or votes cast by them in the exercise of their functions.

Article 15

During the sessions of the Consultative Assembly, the Representatives to the Assembly and their substitutes, whether they be Members of Parliament or not, shall enjoy:

a) on their national territory, the immunities accorded in those countries to members of Parliament;

b) on the territory of all other Member States, exemption form arrest and prosecution.

This immunity also applies when they are travelling to and from the place of meeting of the Consultative Assembly. It does not, however, apply when Representatives and their substitutes are found committing, attempting to commit, or just having committed an offence, nor in cases where the Assembly has waived the immunity.

Part VI

Officials of the Council

Article 16

In addition to the immunities and privileges specified in Article 18 below, the Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary-General shall be accorded in respect of themselves, their spouses and minor children the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilitites accorded to diplomatic envoys in accordance with International Law.

Article 17

The Secretary-General will specify the categories of officials to which the provisions of Article 18 below shall apply. He shall communicate them to the Governments of all members. The names of the officials included in these categories shall from time to time be made known to the above mentioned Governments.

Article 18

Officials of the Council of Europe shall:

a) be immune from legal process in respect of words spoken or written and all acts performed by them in their official capicity and within the limit of their authority;

b) be exempt from taxation on the salaries and emoluments paid to them by the Council of Europe;

c) be immune, together with their spouses and relatives dependent on them, from immigration restrictions and aliens' registration;

d) be accorded the same privileges in respect of exchange facilities as are accorded to officials of comparable rank forming part of diplomatic missions to the Government concerned;

e) be given, together with their spouses and relatives dependent on them, the same repatriation facilities in time of international crisis as diplomatic envoys;

f) have the right to import free of duty their furniture and effects at the time fo first taking up their post in the country in question, and to re-export the same free of duty to their country of domicile.

Article 19

Privileges and immunities are granted to officials in the interests of the Council of Europe and not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. The Secretary-General shall have the right and the duty to waive the immunity of any official in any case where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the Council of Europe. In the case of the Secretary-General and of the Deputy Secretary-General, the Committee of Ministers shall have the right to waive immunity.

Part VII

Supplementary Agreements

Article 20

The Council may conclude with any Member or Members supplementary agreements modifying the provisions of this General Agreement, so far as that member or those Members are concerned.

Part VIII

Disputes

Article 21

Any dispute between the Council and private persons regarding supplies furnished, services rendered or immoved property purchased on behalf of the Council, shall be submitted to arbitration, as provided in an administrative order issued by the Secretary-General with the approval of the Committee of Ministers.

Part IX

Final Provisions

Article 22

The present Agreement shall be ratified. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General. The Agreement shall come into force as soon as seven signatories have deposited their instruments of ratification.

Nevertheless, pending the entry into force of the Agreement in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the signatories agree, in order to avoid any delay in the efficient working of the Council, to apply it provisionally from the date of signature, so far as it is possible to do so under their respective constitutional systems.

In witness whereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries being duly authorised to that effect, have signed the present General Agreement.

Done at Paris, this 2nd day of September, 1949, in French and in English, both, texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall remain in the Archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary-General shall transmit certified copies to each of the signatories.

(Signatures)

Protocol to the General Agreement on privileges andimmunities of the Council of Europe

The Governments signatory to the General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe, signed at Paris on the 2nd September 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the Agreement),

Desirous of extending the provisions of the Agreement,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Any present or future Member of the Council of Europe not a signatory of the Agreement may accede to the latter and to this protocol by depositing its instrument of accession to them both with the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, who shall nivtify the Members of the Council thereof.

Article 2

a) The provisions of Part IV of the Agreement shall apply to representatives attending meetings of the Ministers'Deputies.

b) The provisions of Part IV of the Agreement shall apply to representatives other than Representatives to the Consultative Assembly attending meetings convened by the Council of Europe and held when neither the Committee of Ministers nor the Ministers' Deputies are in session save that representatives attending such meetings shall not be exempt from arrest and prosecution when found committing, attempting to commit, or just having committed an offence.

Article 3

The provisions of Article 15 of the Agreement shall apply to Representatives to the Assembly, and their Substitutes, at any time when they are attending or travelling to and from, meetings of Committees and Sub-Committees of the Consultative Assembly, whether or not the Assembly is itself in session at such time.

Article 4

The permanent representives of Members of the Council of Europe shall, while exercising their functions and during their journey to and from the place of meetings, enjoy the privileges, immunities and facilities normally enjoyed by diplomatic envoys of comparable rank.

Article 5

Privileges, immunities and facilities are accorded to the representatives of Members not for the personal benefit of the individuals concerned, but in order to safeguard the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the council of Europe. Consequently, a Member has not only the right but the duty to waive the immunity of its representative in any case where, in the opinion of the Member, the immunity would impede the course of justice and it can be waived without prejudice to the purpose for which the immunity is accorded.

Article 6

Then provisions of Article 4 are not applicable in relation to the authorities of the State of which the person is a national or of the Member of which he is or has been a representative.

Article 7

a) This Protocol shall be open to signature by all Members which have signed the Agreement. The Protocol shall be ratified at the same time as or after the ratification of the Agreement. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe.

b) This protocol shall enter into force on the day when it shall have been ratified by all the signatories who at that date have ratified the Agreement, on condition that the number of signatories who have ratified the Agreement and the Protocol shall not be fewer than seven.

c) As regards any signatory ratifying subsequently, the Protocol shall enter into force at the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification.

d) In the case of Members which have acceded to the Agreement and Protocol in accordance with the terms of Article 1 the Agreement and Protocol shall enter into force:

(i) On the date specified in paragraphb)above in cases where the instrument of accession has been deposited prior to this date; or

(ii) On the date of deposit of the instrument of accession in cases where this instrument is deposited at a date subsequent to that specified in paragraph b) above.

In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed the present Protocol.

Done at Strasbourg on the 6th day of November 1952, in English an French, both texts being equally authoritative, in a single copy which shall remain deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary-General shall transmit certified copies to each of the signatory and acceding Governments.

Általános Megállapodás az Európa Tanács kiváltságairól és mentességeiről

A Belga Királyság, a Dán Királyság, a Francia Köztársaság, a Görög Királyság, az Ír Köztársaság, az Olasz Köztársaság, a Luxemburgi Nagyhercegség, a Holland Királyság, a Norvég Királyság, a Svéd Királyság, a Török Köztársaság és Nagy-Britannia és Észak-Írország Egyesült Királyság Kormánya;

Minthogy az Alapszabály 40. cikke a) bekezdésében foglalt rendelkezések szerint az Európa Tanács, a Tagállamok képviselői és a Titkárság olyan kiváltságokban és mentességekben részesülnek a Tagállamok területén, amelyek feladataik ellátásához szükségesek;

Minthogy a fent említett cikk b) bekezdésének rendelkezései szerint a Tanács Tagállamai vállalták, hogy Megállapodást kötnek e bekezdés rendelkedéseinek végrehajtására;

Minthogy a fent említett b) bekezdésre tekintettel a Miniszterek Bizottsága úgy határozott, hogy a Tagállamok kormányainak az alábbi rendelkezések elfogadását javasolja;

Megállapodtak a következőkben:

I. rész

Jogi személyiség - Jogképesség

1. cikk

Az Európa Tanácsnak jogi személyisége van. Képessége van szerződések kötésére, ingó- és ingatlan vagyon szerzésére, afölötti rendelkezésre és peres eljárás indítására.

Ezekben az ügyekben az Európa Tanács nevében a Főtitkár jár el.

2. cikk

A Főtitkár mindenkor együttműködik a Tagállamok illetékes hatóságaival, hogy előmozdítsa az igazságszolgáltatás rendes menetét, biztosítsa a rendőri szabályok tiszteletben tartását és megakadályozzon a jelen Megállapodásban felsorolt kiváltságokkal, mentességekkel, kivételekkel és könnyítésekkel kapcsolatos minden visszaélést.

II. rész

Javak, alapok és vagyonok

3. cikk

A Tanács javai és vagyontárgyai, bárhol és bárkinek a birtokában legyenek is azok, mentesek a joghatóság bármely formája alól, kivéve, ha az adott esetben a Miniszterek Bizottsága kifejezetten lemondott a mentességről. E lemondás mindazonáltal nem terjed ki kényszerítő vagy végrehajtási intézkedésekre.

4. cikk

A Tanács épületei és helyiségei sérthetetlenek. Javai és vagyona, bárhol és bárkinek a birtokában legyenek is azok, mentesek a kutatás, rekvirálás, elkobzás, kisajátítás vagy az igazgatási, bírói vagy törvényhozási kényszer bármilyen formája alól.

5. cikk

A Tanács irattára és általában minden irat, amely az övé, vagy amelyet birtokában tart, sérthetetlen, bárhol is van az.

6. cikk

Anélkül, hogy bármely ellenőrzés, szabályozás vagy pénzügyi korlátozás alá esnék;

a) A Tanács bármely pénznemet tarthat birtokában és bármely pénznemben lehetnek számlái;

b) A Tanács szabadon átutalhatja fizetési eszközeit egyik országból a másikba vagy bármely országon belül, és átválthatja pénzeszközeit bármely más pénznemre;

c) az előző a) és b) bekezdésekben biztosított jogok gyakorlása során az Európa Tanács kellő tekintettel tartozik lenni valamely Tagállam kormányának a felszólalására és annak eleget tenni tartozik, ha úgy véli, hogy az megtehető a Tanács érdekeinek sérelme nélkül.

7. cikk

A Tanács, annak vagyona, bevételei és más javai ki vannak véve:

a) minden egyenes adó alól; a Tanács azonban nem fog kivételt igényelni az olyan adók, közterhek vagy más járandóságok alól, amelyek csupán közüzemi szolgáltatások ellenértéke fejében számítanak fel;

b) minden vám, tilalom és korlátozás alól a Tanács által hivatalos használatra szánt árucikkek behozatala és kivitele tekintetében; az ilyen kivétel alapján behozott árucikkeket nem fogják eladni abban az országban, amelyben behozták, kivéve az illető ország kormánya által jóváhagyott feltételek teljesítése esetében;

c) minden vám, tilalom és korlátozás alól a saját kiadványainak behozatala és kivitele tekintetében.

III. rész

Kapcsolatok

8. cikk

A Miniszterek Bizottsága és a Főtitkár mindenhol legalább olyan kedvező elbánásban részesül, mint amelyet ez a Tagállam bármely más kormány diplomáciai képviseletének nyújt.

A Miniszterek Bizottsága és a Titkárság hivatalos levelezése és más hivatalos közlései cenzúra alá nem vonhatók.

IV. rész

A Tagállamok képviselői a Miniszterek Bizottságában

9. cikk

A képviselők a Miniszterek Bizottságában feladataik ellátása során és az ülés helyére való utazásuk és a visszautazásuk közben a következő kiváltságokban és mentességekben részesülnek:

a) Mentesség a letartóztatás és őrizetbe vétel, valamint személyes poggyászuk lefoglalása alól, továbbá a hivatalos minőségükben tett szóbeli és írásbeli nyilatkozatuk, és minden hivatalos cselekményük tekintetében mindenfajta joghatóság alól.

b) Sérthetetlenség minden irat és okmány részére; vagy

c) Jog rejtjel használatára, valamint hivatalos futár által vagy lepecsételt csomagban érkező iratok és levelezés fogadására.

d) Kivétel a saját személyük és házastársuk tekintetében a bevándorlási korlátozások és az idegenekre vonatkozó bejelentési kötelezettség alól abban az államban, amelyet feladataik ellátása során meglátogatnak vagy amelyen átutaznak.

e) Ugyanazok a könnyítések a pénzügyi és átváltási korlátozások alól, mint amelyekben a diplomáciai képviseletek hasonló rangú beosztottai részesülnek.

f) Ugyanazok a mentességek és könnyítések a személyes poggyászuk tekintetében, mint amelyekben a diplomáciai képviseletek hasonló rangú beosztottai részesülnek.

10. cikk

Azért, hogy a Miniszterek Bizottságában működő képviselők számára feladataik ellátása során biztosítva legyen a teljes szólásszabadság és a teljes függetlenség, az általuk feladataik ellátása körében tett szóbeli és írásbeli nyilatkozatokra, illetve cselekedeteikre vonatkozó joghatóság alóli mentesség e személyek megbízatásának megszűnte után is fennmarad.

11. cikk

A Tagállamok képviselői nem azért részesülnek kiváltságokban és mentességekben, hogy azok személyes előnyükre szolgáljanak, hanem azért, hogy biztosítva legyen a Miniszterek Bizottságával kapcsolatos feladataik független gyakorlása. Következésképpen a Tagállamnak nemcsak joga, hanem kötelessége is, hogy lemondjon a képviselője mentességéről minden olyan esetben, amikor a Tagállam véleménye szerint a mentesség akadályozná az igazság érvényesülését és amikor a lemondás megtehető anélkül, hogy sértené azt a célt, amelyért a mentességet adták.

12. cikk

a) A 9., 10. és 11. cikkek rendelkezései nem alkalmazhatók annak az államnak a hatóságaival szemben, amelynek az illető személy az állampolgára, vagy amelynek képviselője vagy korábban képviselője volt.

b) A 9., 10., 11. cikkben és a 12. cikk a) bekezdésében a „képviselő” kifejezés úgy tekintendő, hogy az magában foglal minden képviselőt, helyettes képviselőt, tanácsadót, szakmai szakértőt és a küldöttségek titkárait.

V. rész

Képviselők a Tanácskozó Közgyűlésen

13. cikk

A képviselők és helyetteseik szabad mozgása az ülés helyére való utazásuk és visszautazásuk során semmiféle adminisztratív vagy egyéb korlátozás alá nem vonható.

A képviselők és helyetteseik a vám- és devizaellenőrzés terén:

a) saját kormányuk részéről ugyanolyan könnyítésekben részesítendők, mint a magasabb rangú hivatalnokok, amikor időleges hivatalos útra külföldre utaznak;

b) a többi Tagállam kormánya részéről azokban a könnyítésekben részesítendők, mint amelyeket külföldi kormányok képviselőinek időleges hivatalos útjai során nyújtanak.

14. cikk

A képviselők és helyetteseik feladataik ellátása körében tett nyilatkozataik és szavazataik tekintetében mentesek minden hivatalos kihallgatás, letartóztatás és jogi eljárás alól.

15. cikk

A Tanácskozó Közgyűlés ülésszakainak tartalma alatt a képviselők és helyetteseik, akár parlamenti képviselők, akár nem:

a) hazájuk területén részesülnek azokban a mentességekben, amelyek parlamenti képviselőknek járnak;

b) minden más Tagállam területén mentesek a letartóztatás és minden bírói eljárás alól.

Ez a mentesség akkor is megilleti őket, amikor a Tanácskozó Közgyűlés ülésének helyére, vagy onnan visszautaznak. Nem illeti meg őket, ha a képviselőt, illetve helyettesét bűncselekmény elkövetésében vagy annak kísérletében tetten érik, és azokban az esetekben sem, amikor a Tanácskozó Közgyűlés a képviselő vagy helyettese mentességéről lemondott.

VI. rész

A Tanács tisztviselői

16. cikk

Az alább következő 18. cikkben felsorolt kiváltságokon és mentességeken kívül a Főtitkárt és a Főtitkár-helyettest, saját személyüket, valamint házastársuk és kiskorú gyermekeik személyét illetően megilletik azok a kiváltságok, mentességek, kivételek és könnyítések, amelyekben a diplomáciai képviselők a nemzetközi jog szerint részesülnek.

17. cikk

A Főtitkár fogja meghatározni a tisztviselők ama kategóriáit, amelyekre az alább következő 18. cikk alkalmazást nyer. Erről értesíteni fogja valamennyi Tagállam kormányát. Az egyes kategóriákba tartozó tisztviselők nevét időről időre közölni kell az említett kormányokkal.

18. cikk

Az Európa Tanács tisztviselői

a) mentesek a joghatóság alól az általuk - jogkörük korlátai között - hivatalos minőségükben szóban vagy írásban tett nyilatkozataik és e minőségükben végzett minden cselekményük tekintetében;

b) mentesek a nekik az Európa Tanács részéről nyújtott fizetés és javadalmazás adózása alól;

c) mentesek, házastársukkal és az általuk eltartott családtagjaikkal egyetemben a bevándorlási korlátozások és az idegenekre vonatkozó bejelentési kötelezettség alól;

d) pénznemek átváltása tekintetében ugyanazokban a könnyítésekben részesülnek, mint az illető kormányhoz akkreditált diplomáciai képviseletek hasonló rangú tisztviselői;

e) nemzetközi válsághelyzetekben, házastársukkal és az általuk eltartott családtagjaikkal egyetemben, ugyanazokban a hazatelepülési könnyítésekben részesülnek, mint a diplomáciai képviselők;

f) jogosultak bútoraik és értékeik vámmentes behozatalára, amikor először lépnek hivatalba az illető országban és hivataluk megszűntével azok vámmentes kivitelére abba az országba, amelyben lakóhelyük van.

19. cikk

A tisztviselőket a kiváltságok és mentességek az Európa Tanács érdekében illetik meg, nem személyes előnyök szerzése céljából.

A Főtitkár jogosult és köteles bármely tisztviselő mentességéről lemondani valamennyi olyan esetben, amikor megítélése szerint a mentesség fenntartása gátolja az igazságszolgáltatást, és a lemondás nem sérti az Európa Tanács érdekeit. A Főtitkár és helyettese esetében a Miniszteri Bizottság jogosult a mentességről történő lemondásra.

VII. rész

Kiegészítő megállapodások

20. cikk

A Tanács egy vagy több Tagállammal kiegészítő megállapodásokat köthet, amelyek az illető Tagállam vagy Tagállamok viszonylatában ennek az Általános Megállapodásnak a rendelkezéseit módosítják.

VIII. rész

Viták

21. cikk

Minden vitát, amely a Tanács és magánszemélyek között a Tanács részére végzett áruszállítás, szolgáltatások vagy ingatlanvásárlás kapcsán keletkezett, választott bíróság elé kell vinni ama szabályoknak megfelelően, amelyeket a Főtitkár - a Miniszterek Bizottságának jóváhagyásával kiadott - rendeletben határoz meg.

IX. rész

-----STARTING---POINT---VEGE---

Záró rendelkezések

22. cikk

A jelen Megállapodást meg kell erősíteni. A megerősítő okiratokat a Főtitkárnál kell letétbe helyezni. A Megállapodás akkor lép hatályba, amikor hét aláíró állam a megerősítő okiratát letétbe helyezte.

Mindazonáltal mielőtt a Megállapodás az előző bekezdés rendelkezései szerint hatályba lép, az aláírók megegyeznek abban, hogy a Tanács hatékony működésének késlekedését megakadályozandó, a Megállapodást aláírásától kezdve ideiglenesen alkalmazzák annyiban, amennyiben azt a saját alkotmányos rendjük lehetővé teszi.

A fentiek hiteléül az erre nézve kellően felhatalmazottak a jelen Általános Megállapodást aláírták.

Kelt Párizsban, az 1949. évi szeptember hó 2. napján, angol és francia nyelven, mindkét szöveg egyaránt hiteles, egyetlen példányban, amely az Európa Tanács irattárában marad. A Főtitkár minden aláíró államnak hitelesített másolatot juttat el.

(Aláírások)

Jegyzőkönyvaz Európa Tanács kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szólóÁltalános Megállapodáshoz

Az Európa Tanács kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szóló, Párizsban, 1949. szeptember 2-án aláírt Általános Megállapodást (a továbbiakban: Megállapodás) aláíró kormányok,

a Megállapodás rendelkezéseinek kiterjesztését óhajtván elérni,

megállapodtak a következőkben:

1. cikk

Az Európa Tanács minden jelenlegi vagy jövőbeli Tagállama, amely nem írta alá a Megállapodást, csatlakozhat ahhoz és a jelen Jegyzőkönyvhöz, ha letétbe helyezi mindkettőre vonatkozó csatlakozási okiratát az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál, aki erről a Tanács Tagállamait értesíti. 

2. cikk

a) A Megállapodás IV. része vonatkozik azokra a képviselőkre, akik a miniszterek helyetteseinek ülésein vesznek részt.

b) A Megállapodás IV. része vonatkozik azokra a képviselőkre (ide nem értve a Tanácskozó Közgyűlés képviselőit), akik az Európa Tanács által összehívott azon üléseken vesznek részt, amelyeket akkor tartanak, amikor sem a Miniszterek Bizottságának, sem a miniszterek helyettesei bizottságának nincsenek folyamatban ülésszakai; az ilyen üléseken résztvevő képviselők mindazonáltal nem mentesek a letartóztatás és a bírói eljárás alól, ha őket bűncselekmény elkövetésében vagy annak kísérletében tetten érik.

3. cikk

A Megállapodás 15. cikke a Tanácskozó Közgyűlés képviselőire és helyetteseikre akkor is vonatkozik, ha a Közgyűlés egy bizottságában vagy albizottságában vesznek részt vagy az ülés helyszínére, illetve onnan visszautaznak, akár ülésezik abban az időben a Közgyűlés, akár nem.

4. cikk

A Tagállamoknak az Európa Tanács melletti állandó képviselői feladataik gyakorlása során az ülések helyszínére való utazásuk, illetve onnan való visszautazásuk folyamán azokban a kiváltságokban, mentességekben és könnyítésekben részesülnek, amelyek a hasonló rangú diplomáciai képviselőknek járnak.

5. cikk

Ezeket a kiváltságokat, mentességeket és könnyítéseket a Tagállamok képviselőinek nem személyes előnyükre adják, hanem azért, hogy biztosítsák az Európa Tanáccsal kapcsolatos feladataik független gyakorlását. Következésképpen a Tagállamnak nemcsak joga, de kötelessége is, hogy lemondjon képviselőjének mentességéről minden olyan esetben, amikor a mentesség akadályozná az igazság érvényesülését, és amikor a lemondás megtehető anélkül, hogy sértené azt a célt, amelyért a mentességet adták.

6. cikk

A 4. cikk rendelkezései nem alkalmazhatók az olyan állam hatóságaival szemben, amelynek az illető személy állampolgára, vagy amelynek képviselője, vagy korábban képviselője volt.

7. cikk

a) Ez a Jegyzőkönyv aláírásra nyitva áll mindazon Tagállamok részére, amelyek a Megállapodást aláírták. A Jegyzőkönyvet meg kell erősíteni, ugyanakkor, amikor a Megállapodást, vagy annak megerősítését követőleg. A megerősítő okiratokat az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál kell letétbe helyezni.

b) Ez a Jegyzőkönyv azon a napon lép hatályba, amikor azt mindazok az aláíró Tagállamok megerősítették, amelyek ugyanakkor megerősítették a Megállapodást, feltéve, hogy azoknak az aláíró Tagállamoknak a száma, amelyek a Megállapodást és Jegyzőkönyvet megerősítették, hétnél nem kevesebb.

c) Azoknak a Tagállamoknak a vonatkozásában, amelyek ezt követőleg erősítik meg, a Jegyzőkönyv a megerősítő okirat letétbe helyezésének napján lép hatályba.

d) Azoknak a Tagállamoknak a vonatkozásában, amelyek az 1. cikk szerint a Megállapodáshoz és a Jegyzőkönyvhöz csatlakoztak, a Megállapodás és a Jegyzőkönyv hatályba lép:

(i) a fenti b) bekezdésben meghatározott időpontban azokban az esetekben, amikor a csatlakozási okirat letétbe helyezése ezen időpontot megelőzőleg megtörtént; vagy

(ii) a csatlakozási okirat letétbe helyezése napján azokban az esetekben, amikor a letétbe helyezés a fenti b) bekezdésben meghatározott időpontot követően történt.

Ennek hiteléül a kellően feljogosított meghatalmazottak a jelen Jegyzőkönyvet aláírták.

Kelt Strasbourgban, az 1952. évi november hó 6. napján, angol és francia nyelven, mindkét szöveg egyaránt hiteles, egyetlen példányban, amely az Európa Tanács irattárában marad. A Főtitkár minden aláíró és csatlakozó államhoz hitelesített másolatot juttat el.

(Aláírások)

3. § Ez a törvény a kihirdetése napján lép hatályba, rendelkezéseit azonban 1990. november 6-tól kell alkalmazni.