2018. évi LXXXVII. törvény

a Magyarország és a Vietnami Szocialista Köztársaság között a polgári ügyekben nyújtandó kölcsönös jogsegélyről szóló megállapodás kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország és a Vietnami Szocialista Köztársaság között a polgári ügyekben nyújtandó kölcsönös jogsegélyről szóló megállapodás (a továbbiakban: Megállapodás) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Megállapodás hiteles angol és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„AGREEMENT BETWEEN HUNGARY AND THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM ON MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE IN CIVIL MATTERS

Hungary and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam (hereinafter individually: Contracting Party; hereinafter collectively: Contracting Parties),

Desiring to strengthen mutual legal cooperation in civil matters between the Contracting Parties on the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and equality as well as mutual advantages,

Have agreed on the following:

PART ONE

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1

Scope

1. The Contracting Parties shall provide each other, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, mutual legal assistance in the following issues related to civil matters:

a) service of judicial and extra-judicial documents;

b) taking and transferring of evidence;

c) summons of witnesses and experts;

d) recognition and enforcement of decisions and arbitral awards as provided for in Part Four of this Agreement;

e) exchange of legal information and documents relating to civil matters and mutual legal assistance in civil matters;

f) providing and transferring of civil record documents;

g) other requests for mutual legal assistance.

2. The term “civil” in this Agreement shall include civil, marriage and family, business, commercial and labour matters.

3. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, the term “competent authorities” means all courts and other authorities that have competence in civil matters pursuant to the law of the Contracting Party concerned.

Article 2

Judicial Protection of Rights

1. Citizens of either Contracting Party shall, in the territory of the other Contracting Party, enjoy the same judicial protection of personal and property rights as citizens of the other Contracting Party and have the right to access to and exercise procedural rights before the courts and other competent authorities having jurisdiction over civil matters of the other Contracting Party under the same conditions accorded to the citizens of the other Contracting Party in civil matters.

2. The provisions of this Agreement shall also apply to legal persons and other entities without legal personality established in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties pursuant to its national law.

Article 3

Channels of Communication

1. In the course of the application of this Agreement, the authorities of the Contracting Parties acting in civil matters shall contact each other through the designated Central Authorities of the Contracting Parties.

2. The Contracting Parties shall communicate the data on the designated Central Authorities and any changes thereof to each other through diplomatic channels simultaneously with the communication under Article 32 on the ratification of the Agreement, whereas later changes shall be communicated without delay.

3. In order to facilitate communication between each other, the Central Authorities of the Contracting Parties shall designate a contact person whose name and contact details as well as any changes thereof shall be communicated to each other.

4. This Agreement shall not prevent the Contracting Parties from sending requests for legal assistance through diplomatic channels.

Article 4

Lis pendens

1. If there are proceedings pending before the authority of either Contracting Party, between the same parties, initiated for the same right arising from the same factual basis, and the decision made therein may be recognised and enforced on the basis of the Agreement in the territory of the other Contracting Party, the authority of this other Contracting Party may terminate the proceedings commenced before it subsequently.

2. For the application of paragraph 1, the authorities of the Contracting Parties may, through the Central Authorities, request information on proceedings pending in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Article 5

Use of languages

1. The language of communication between the Central Authorities shall be English.

2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, requests for legal assistance as well as accompanying documents shall be prepared by the requesting authority in its own language and the requesting authority shall attach thereto a certified translation in the language of the requested authority.

3. The requested authority shall send its reply to the request for legal assistance and the documents attached thereto in its own language.

Article 6

Exemption from legalisation

1. Public documents issued by the competent authorities of one of the Contracting Parties as well as private documents carrying an official clause such as, in particular, the certification of registration, signature or identity, that are forwarded under Article 3 in the course of the application of the Agreement, shall not require additional legalisation. The sending Contracting Party shall ensure the authenticity of the documents sent as indicated above.

2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if there is reasonable doubt that the signature, the status of the signing person or the seal or the stamp is not authentic, the competent authority of the Contracting Party may, in the manner specified in Article 3, request the Central Authority of the other Contracting Party to verify the authenticity of the documents. Such verification may only be requested in exceptional cases, indicating the underlying reasons.

Article 7

Execution of legal assistance requests

1. The requested Contracting Party shall execute requests for legal assistance in accordance with its national law.

2. The requested Contracting Party may execute requests for legal assistance in a specific manner requested by the requesting Contracting Party if such execution is not contrary to the law of the requested Contracting Party.

3. If the address indicated in the request is inaccurate or the addressee named in the request cannot be found at the given address during execution of the request for legal assistance, the competent authority of the requested Contracting Party shall return the request to the requesting Contracting Party or take the necessary measures to determine the address ex officio, provided that it possesses the necessary data for that execution.

4. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, a request for legal assistance shall be timely and expeditiously executed within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of receipt of the request. In case of delay for legitimate reasons, the requested Contracting Party shall promptly inform the requesting Contracting Party.

Article 8

Refusal and postponement of legal assistance

1. The requested Contracting Party may refuse to execute the request submitted under this Agreement, if it considers that executing the request would prejudice its sovereignty, public safety, public order or the fundamental principles of its legal order, or if executing the request does not fall within the functions of the competent authorities of the requested Contracting Party. The requested Contracting Party shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of the receipt of the request, inform the requesting Contracting Party of the reason for refusal to execute the request.

2. The execution of a request for legal assistance may be postponed if the requested Contracting Party finds that the immediate execution of the request is likely to impede ongoing proceedings in the territory of the requested Contracting Party. The requested Contracting Party shall inform the requesting Contracting Party of the reasons and a foreseeable duration of the postponement within thirty (30) days from the date of receiving the request.

Article 9

Costs of legal assistance

1. The Contracting Parties shall provide each other legal assistance free of charge, except for the following cases:

a) expenses relating to a witness or expert shall be subject to Articles 14 and 15 of this Agreement;

b) expenses of an expert or interpreter relating to the execution of request for taking evidence as provided for in Article 13 of this Agreement if the expert or interpreter is not a public servant. In such cases, the Contracting Parties shall consult each other to determine these expenses;

c) expenses related to recognition and enforcement of decisions and arbitral awards in the courts of each Contracting Parties;

d) costs of service of documents in accordance with Article 12 of the Convention on the service abroad of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters, done at The Hague, on the 15th day of November, 1965 (hereinafter: Hague Service Convention);

e) extraordinary or particular expenses if the requesting Contracting Party requests for execution according to a special procedure.

2. The requested Contracting Party may claim the advancement and the reimbursement of costs under this Article in accordance with the law of the requested Contracting Party.

PART TWO

PROCEDURE FOR LEGAL ASSISTANCE

Article 10

Service of documents

1. A request for service of documents shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:

a) date and place of issuance of the request;

b) full name, address and any other contact information of the requesting authority, including telephone and fax number as well as e-mail address;

c) full name, address and any other contact information of the requested authority (if known);

d) a list of documents to be served;

e) full name and address of addressee, and if known: gender, citizenship, occupation, place of birth of the addressee as well as name and address of his/her representatives;

f) information on the nature of the case;

g) description of the requested special procedure to serve documents (if any).

2. The request and the documents to be served shall be sent in two (2) copies.

3. If service under this Article cannot be effected in sufficient time to enable the addressee to arrange for his/her defence, the requested Contracting Party may refuse the execution of the request.

4. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of Article 5, if there is no certified translation in the official language of the requested Contracting Party attached to the documents to be served or the documents are not written in that language, the documents can only be served on the addressee if that person accepts them voluntarily.

5. The Contracting Parties may request service by electronic means (e-service) subject to legal and practical conditions in both Contracting Parties.

6. The requested Contracting Party, after serving the documents, shall send to the requesting Contracting Party a certificate or other documents proving the service of documents or notify the requesting Contracting Party of the reasons that prevented full or partial execution of the request of service of documents. A copy of the certificate or other documents may, upon request, be sent by fax or e-mail before the original is sent by post.

7. The authorities of the Contracting Parties may also serve documents by post to persons residing in the territory of the other Contracting Party, however due service can only be effected if the following requirements are met:

a) the document has been sent as a registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt, and

b) a certified translation has been attached to the document in the official language of the Contracting Party where service takes place, unless the addressee is a citizen of the sending Contracting Party, and

c) the addressee voluntarily accepted the document, and attested the receipt with the addressee’s signature, and

d) the service takes place in sufficient time to enable the addressee to arrange for the addressee’s defence.

Article 11

Execution of service of documents under the Hague Service Convention

Notwithstanding Article 10, the Contracting Parties may apply the Hague Service Convention.

Article 12

Taking of evidence

1. Taking of evidence means in particular transferring physical evidence or documents; hearing parties, witnesses, experts and other persons; performing inspections.

2. The request for the taking of evidence shall be drafted by the authority in the proceedings of which the necessity of legal assistance arises, and it shall contain the following information:

a) full name of the requesting authority and, if known, of the requested authority;

b) designation of the case, including the nature and subject matter of the case, and a brief presentation of the facts of the case, as well as the name of the parties involved in the proceedings and their possible legal representatives;

c) full name, address, residence and if known the number of identity card (citizen card), passport and, if necessary, citizenship, occupation and other data of those persons at whom the request is directed and their possible legal representatives; or the full name, registered address or centre of administration in the case of legal persons;

d) the purpose, summary of the request, the information necessary for the execution of the request, including questions to be put to the concerned persons or organizations; documents or materials to be examined; and necessary measures (if needed).

Article 13

The handling of a request for the taking of evidence

1. At the request of the requesting authority, the requested authority shall communicate the place and time of the execution of the legal assistance in a timely fashion.

2. Subject to legal and practical conditions in the requested Contracting Party, the request for taking of evidence shall include establishing the address of a person, residing in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties, against whom a person, having domicile or residence in the territory of the other Contracting Party, presents a claim in a matter falling under paragraph 2 of Article 1 and, furthermore, also establishing the place of work of and the amount of income of the person against whom a claim for maintenance has been filed. In order to facilitate such requests being completed, the requesting Contracting Party shall communicate all data available in the case.

3. The requested Contracting Party shall inform in writing the requesting Contracting Party of the outcome of the execution of the request, attaching the requested evidence and related documents, or of the obstacles to execution.

Article 14

Summoning of witnesses and experts

1. The appearance of a witness or expert residing in the territory of the other Contracting Party shall be voluntary, no coercive measure may be used against witness or expert who does not appear.

2. The summons shall be served on the witness or the expert at least ninety (90) days before the day on which he/she must appear before the competent authority of the requesting Contracting Party.

3. In the summons, the witness or the expert shall be informed of his/her rights and obligations, the conditions for the advancement and reimbursement of his/her costs and fees, and the manner of payment. In the summons, no reference shall be made to the use of any coercive measure against the witness or the expert.

4. If possible, the requested Contracting Party shall inform the requesting Contracting Party on whether the person summoned intends to comply with the summons.

Article 15

Protection and costs of witnesses and experts

1. A witness or expert who has been summoned from the territory of the other Contracting Party, and who appears before the authority of the requesting Contracting Party shall not be, in the territory of this Contracting Party, subjected to criminal proceedings, be arrested, have his/her personal freedom restricted in any manner for any act or on the basis of any conviction, that has been committed before his/her entry into the territory of the requesting Contracting Party.

2. The protection under paragraph 1 of this Article shall cease after fifteen (15) days following the day on which the competent authority of the requesting Contracting Party has, in writing, officially communicated to the witness or expert that his/her presence is no longer necessary, if the witness or the expert has not left or has left, but returned to the territory of the requesting Contracting Party. This 15 day period of time shall not include any period of time during which the witness or the expert was not able to leave the territory of the requesting Contracting Party through no fault of his/her own.

3. The witness or the expert may claim the reimbursement of his/her travel and subsistence expenses, as well as fees. These costs shall be borne by the requesting Contracting Party. The subsistence expenses and the fees shall be determined to be at least as high as the amounts determined in the schedules of fees and provisions in force at the Contracting Party where the hearing is to be performed. At his/her request the whole or part of the travel and subsistence expenses shall be advanced to the witness or the expert.

4. The requesting Contracting Party shall facilitate the witness’ or expert’s entry to and stay in the territory of the requesting Contracting Party in accordance with its national law.

Article 16

Sending of public documents on civil status

1. Each Contracting Party shall, upon request in accordance with Article 3, send to the other Contracting Party the documents on the civil status of the citizens of the latter as provided for by the law of the Requesting Contracting Party (court decisions, extracts from the civil register and certified copies).

2. The documents mentioned in paragraph 1 shall be sent to the other Contracting Party without a translation in accordance with Article 3.

Article 17

Provision of information on the law

1. Upon request, the Central Authorities of the Contracting Parties provide information on the legislation of their States as well as the case law of the courts.

2. In case the provision of information on the law of the requested Contracting Party is necessary for making a decision in a case pending before an authority acting in a civil case, the Central Authority of the requested Contracting Party shall provide, on the basis of a request of the requesting authority forwarded under Article 3, information on its legislation and the case law of the courts.

3. The request under paragraph 2 shall contain the following:

a) full name of the requesting authority;

b) a brief description of the case and the indication of additional pieces of information which may facilitate the response;

c) the questions for which information on the law of the requested Contracting Party is necessary.

4. The requested Contracting Party shall provide the information in its official language or, if available, in English.

PART THREE

PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS

Article 18

Exemption from security for litigation costs

A citizen of either Contracting Party, who has domicile or residence in the territory of one of the Contracting Parties shall not be obliged to provide security in the territory of the other Contracting Party for litigation costs or any other security because he/she is a foreigner or because he/she has no domicile or residence in the territory of the Contracting Party before the authority of which he/she proceeds.

Article 19

Entitlement to legal aid and benefits of litigation costs

Citizens of either Contracting Party shall be entitled to legal aid and benefits of litigation costs in the territory of the other Contracting Party under the same conditions and to the same extent applying to citizens of the other Contracting Party.

Article 20

Application for legal aid and benefits of litigation costs

1. Citizens of either Contracting Party may apply for legal aid and benefits of litigation costs provided for by Article 19.

2. Such application shall be submitted

a) directly to the competent authority of the Contracting Party in the territory of which legal aid, benefits of litigation costs is sought; or

b) through the competent authority of the Contracting Party of the applicant’s citizenship; this authority shall forward the application and its enclosures to the competent authority of the Contracting Party in the territory of which legal aid, benefits of litigation costs is sought in accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 3.

3. The application and its enclosures shall be supplemented with a certified translation into the language of the Contracting Party in the territory of which legal aid, benefits of litigation costs is sought.

4. The authority that makes a decision on the application, may request supplementary information from the applicant if it considers it necessary.

PART FOUR

RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT OF DECISIONS

Article 21

General provisions relating to recognition and enforcement of decisions

1. The provisions of this Part shall not apply to decisions made in procedures relating to insolvency.

2. For the purposes of application of this Part “decision” means any final and binding judgement or other decision given by a competent authority of a Contracting Party in a civil matter, whatever the decision may be called. This definition includes, in particular, decisions brought in regard to civil claims asserted in criminal and administrative cases as well as extrajudicial decisions made regarding personal status, marriage, family, succession or commercial matters.

Article 22

Recognition and enforcement of decisions

1. A decision made by the authority of either Contracting Party in the matter of personal status and dissolution or invalidity of marriage shall be recognised in the territory of the other Contracting Party without any additional proceedings. This provision shall not prevent any interested person from applying, in accordance with the law of this other Contracting Party, to the court of the other Contracting Party to declare that the decision is recognised or not recognised in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

2. A decision made by the authority of either Contracting Party not covered by paragraph 1 shall be recognised in accordance with the procedural law of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition is sought.

3. A decision recognised by either Contracting Party pursuant to paragraph 1 or 2 has the legal effect under the law of the decision-making Contracting Party in the territory of the Contracting Party of the place of recognition.

4. A decision recognised under paragraph 2 of this Article that is enforceable under the law of the decision-making Contracting Party shall be enforced in accordance with the law of the Contracting Party in the territory of which enforcement is sought.

Article 23

Refusal of the recognition and enforcement of decisions

1. The recognition and enforcement of decisions under Article 22 shall be refused if:

a) the authority of the Contracting Party which made the decision had no jurisdiction to decide the case pursuant to the law of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition and enforcement of the decision is sought;

b) the defendant or the person against whom the decision to be enforced has been made did not participate in the proceedings because the document instituting the proceedings had not been duly served on that person in sufficient time to allow that person to prepare the defence;

c) proceedings for the same right arising from the same factual basis between the same parties was commenced at the authority of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition and enforcement of the decision is sought earlier than at the authority of the Contracting Party where the decision was made;

d) a final and binding decision regarding the same right arising from the same factual basis between the same parties was made earlier by the authority of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition and enforcement of the decision is sought;

e) a final and binding decision has been made earlier in a third state regarding the same right arising from the same factual basis between the same parties which may be recognised and enforced in the territory of the Contracting Party in which recognition and enforcement of the decision is sought;

f) the recognition or enforcement of the decision is contrary to the public policy of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition and enforcement is sought.

2. If, in matters regarding personal status and family law, jurisdiction is based on citizenship according to the law of either Contracting Party, in the course of the application of point a) of paragraph 1 both citizenships shall be taken into account of a person who is a citizen of both Contracting Parties.

Article 24

Application of national law for the recognition and enforcement of decisions

If a decision made by the authority of either Contracting Party cannot be recognised or enforced in the territory of the other Contracting Party pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement, the Agreement shall not prevent recognition and enforcement of the decision pursuant to the national law of this latter Contracting Party.

Article 25

Application for recognition or enforcement of the decision

1. The application for recognition or enforcement of the decision may be submitted directly to the competent authority of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition or enforcement is sought.

2. The application may also be submitted to the authority which made the decision of first instance in the case; in such an event, the application shall be sent to the authority of the other Contracting Party, through the Central Authorities; however, the task of the Central Authorities shall be limited to sending the application and its enclosures.

3. The application shall contain the following information:

a) name and address of the applicant and, where applicable, the name and address of the legal representative of the applicant;

b) name and address of the opposing party and, where applicable, the name and address of the legal representative of the opposing party;

c) where applicable, information related to the property of the opposing party in the territory of the Contracting Party in which enforcement is sought; and

d) additional information that can facilitate making the decision on recognition or enforcement.

4. The following shall be enclosed to the application:

a) the decision or its certified copy,

b) the certificate which certifies that the decision is final and binding and enforceable, unless this is apparent from the decision itself;

c) a certificate stating that the document instituting the proceedings has been served duly and in sufficient time on the losing party who did not participate in the lawsuit;

d) the certified translation of the application as well as the documents mentioned under point a) to c) in the language of the Contracting Party in the territory of which recognition or enforcement is sought.

Article 26

Procedures related to recognition or enforcement of decisions

1. The national law of the requested Contracting Party shall apply to issues regarding the procedures on recognition or enforcement of decisions not regulated in this Agreement.

2. A decision made by the authority of the other Contracting Party shall not be reviewed on the merits. The court deciding on the application for recognition or enforcement shall solely resort to determining whether the conditions for recognition or enforcement, as determined under this Part, exist.

3. The obligor may raise the objections against the enforcement allowed by the law of the Contracting Party the authority of which has made the decision on the enforcement.

Article 27

Settlements

The provisions of this Part shall apply mutatis mutandis to settlements approved by a competent authority.

Article 28

Recognition and enforcement of arbitration awards

The Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards done in New York, on June 10 1958 shall apply to recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in the territory of either Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

PART FIVE

TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 29

Relationship with other international agreements

1. The provisions of this Agreement do not affect the rights and obligations of the Contracting Parties arising from other international agreements to which both Contracting Parties are Parties.

2. This agreement does not affect Hungary’s obligations, including future obligations, arising from the membership of the European Union.

Article 30

Transitional provisions

1. Articles 21 to 27 of this Agreement shall also apply to recognition and enforcement of decisions made and settlements approved prior to entry into force of the Agreement but not before 16 February 1986.

2. The Treaty on legal assistance in matters of civil, family and criminal law, signed in Hanoi on 18 January 1985 shall apply to requests for legal assistance sent to, but not yet executed by the requested Contracting Party before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Article 31

Dispute resolution, conciliation

1. The Contracting Parties shall handle their contentious issues, which may emerge in relation to the application, interpretation and execution of this Agreement, in negotiations carried out via their Central Authorities.

2. The Contracting Parties shall ensure the exchange of positions and opinions regarding the implementation of the Agreement in the framework of the mechanisms of cooperation existing between them.

3. The Contracting Parties shall review and evaluate the implementation of the Agreement every three years.

Article 32

Ratification and entry into force

1. This Agreement shall be ratified in accordance with the provisions of the national law of the Contracting Parties. The Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after the receipt of the last written notification through diplomatic channels by which the Contracting Parties notify each other that they have completed their ratification procedures.

2. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time.

3. With the entry into force of this Agreement the Treaty on legal assistance in matters of civil, family and criminal law, signed in Hanoi on 18 January 1985, shall be repealed.

4. Either Contracting Party may terminate this Agreement by sending a written notice to the other Contracting Party through diplomatic channels. Termination shall take effect six months after the day on which it was received by the other Contracting Party.

5. In the event of the termination of the Agreement, requests for legal assistance received before termination took effect shall be handled pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, duly authorised pursuant to their national law, do sign the present Agreement.

Done at Budapest, on 10th September 2018 in two original copies in the Hungarian, Vietnamese and English languages. All three language versions are equally authentic. In case of any contradiction or divergence of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.”

„MEGÁLLAPODÁS MAGYARORSZÁG ÉS A VIETNAMI SZOCIALISTA KÖZTÁRSASÁG KÖZÖTT A POLGÁRI ÜGYEKBEN NYÚJTANDÓ KÖLCSÖNÖS JOGSEGÉLYRŐL

Magyarország és a Vietnami Szocialista Köztársaság (a továbbiakban külön-külön: Szerződő Fél, együttesen: Szerződő Felek),

a szuverenitás és az egyenlőség iránti kölcsönös tisztelet és a kölcsönös előnyök alapján, attól az óhajtól vezérelve, hogy országaik között az igazságügyi együttműködést előmozdítsák,

az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

ELSŐ RÉSZ

ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

1. Cikk

Hatály

1. A Szerződő Felek polgári ügyekben kölcsönösen jogsegélyt nyújtanak egymásnak e Megállapodás rendelkezéseinek megfelelően a következő tárgykörökben:

a) bírósági és bíróságon kívüli iratok kézbesítése;

b) bizonyításfelvétel és bizonyítékok továbbítása;

c) tanúk és szakértők idézése;

d) határozatok és választott bírósági ítéletek elismerése és végrehajtása a Megállapodás Negyedik Részében foglaltak szerint

e) polgári ügyekhez és a kölcsönös polgári jogsegélyhez kapcsolódó jogi információk és iratok cseréje;

f) anyakönyvi okiratok rendelkezésre bocsátása és megküldése;

g) kölcsönös jogsegély iránti egyéb kérelmek.

2. E Megállapodás alkalmazásában a „polgári” kifejezés magába foglalja a polgári, a házasságra vonatkozó és családjogi, üzleti, kereskedelmi és munkajogi ügyeket.

3. Eltérő rendelkezés hiányában e Megállapodás alkalmazásában az „illetékes hatóságok” kifejezés mindazon bíróságokat és más hatóságokat jelenti, amelyek az érintett Szerződő Fél joga szerint polgári ügyekben hatáskörrel rendelkeznek.

2. Cikk

Jogvédelem

1. Bármelyik Szerződő Fél állampolgárai a másik Szerződő Fél területén személyi és vagyoni jogaik tekintetében ugyanolyan jogvédelemben részesülnek, mint a másik Szerződő Félnek az állampolgárai, és ugyanolyan feltételekkel fordulhatnak a másik Szerződő Fél polgári ügyekben hatáskörrel rendelkező bíróságaihoz vagy más hatóságaihoz és gyakorolhatják ezek előtt eljárási jogaikat, mint a másik Szerződő Fél állampolgárai polgári ügyekben.

2. E Megállapodás rendelkezéseit alkalmazni kell azokra a jogi személyekre és jogi személyiséggel nem rendelkező egyéb jogalanyokra is, amelyeket valamely Szerződő Fél területén, annak nemzeti joga szerint hoztak létre.

3. Cikk

A kapcsolattartás módja

1. E Megállapodás alkalmazása során a Szerződő Felek polgári ügyekben eljáró hatóságai a Szerződő Felek kijelölt Központi Hatóságai útján érintkeznek egymással.

2. A Szerződő Felek a kijelölt Központi Hatóságokra vonatkozó adatokat és az azokban bekövetkezett változásokat diplomáciai úton, a Megállapodás megerősítéséről szóló, 32. Cikk szerinti közléssel egyidejűleg, a később bekövetkező változásokat pedig azok bekövetkezését követően késedelem nélkül közlik egymással.

3. A Szerződő Felek Központi Hatóságai az egymás közötti kommunikáció elősegítésére kapcsolattartó személyt jelölnek ki, akinek nevét és elérhetőségét, illetve az ezekben bekövetkezett változást közlik egymással.

4. E Megállapodás nem akadályozza meg a Szerződő Feleket abban, hogy diplomáciai úton küldjék meg a jogsegély iránti kérelmeket egymás részére.

4. Cikk

Lis Pendens

1. Ha valamely Szerződő Fél hatósága előtt ugyanazon felek között, ugyanabból a ténybeli alapból származó ugyanazon jog iránt van folyamatban eljárás, és az ügyben meghozott határozat a másik Szerződő Fél területén a Megállapodás alapján elismerhető és végrehajtható, e másik Szerződő Fél hatósága megszüntetheti az előtte később indított eljárást.

2. Az 1. bekezdés alkalmazásához a Szerződő Felek hatóságai a Központi Hatóságokon keresztül tájékoztatást kérhetnek a másik Szerződő Fél területén folyamatban lévő eljárásról.

5. Cikk

Nyelvhasználat

1. A Központi Hatóságok közötti kommunikáció nyelve az angol.

2. Ha e Megállapodás eltérően nem rendelkezik, a jogsegélykérelmeket valamint a kísérő iratokat a megkereső hatóság a saját nyelvén készíti el, és ahhoz a megkeresett hatóság nyelvén készült hiteles fordítást csatol.

3. A megkeresett hatóság a jogsegélykérelemre a választ és az ahhoz csatolt iratokat a saját nyelvén küldi meg.

6. Cikk

Hitelesítés alóli mentesség

1. A Szerződő Felek egyikének illetékes hatóságai által kiállított közokiratok, valamint a hivatalos záradékkal, így különösen a nyilvántartásba vétel, aláírás vagy személyazonosság igazolására vonatkozó záradékkal ellátott magánokiratok, amelyek a Megállapodás alkalmazása során a 3. Cikk alapján kerülnek továbbításra, további hitelesítésre nem szorulnak. A fentieknek megfelelően küldött okiratok hitelességét a küldő Szerződő Fél biztosítja.

2. Az 1. bekezdés ellenére, ha észszerű kétség merül fel, hogy az aláírás, az aláíró személy státusza, illetve a pecsét vagy a bélyegzőlenyomat nem valódi, a Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága a 3. Cikk szerinti módon kérheti a másik Szerződő Fél Központi Hatóságától az okiratok hitelességének ellenőrzését. Az ellenőrzés kizárólag kivételesen, az annak alapjául szolgáló indokok megjelölésével kérhető.

7. Cikk

A jogsegélykérelem végrehajtása

1. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél a jogsegély iránti megkeresést a nemzeti jogával összhangban hajtja végre.

2. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél a jogsegélykérelmet a megkereső Szerződő Fél által kért különös módon teljesítheti, feltéve, hogy az nem ellentétes a megkeresett Szerződő Fél jogával.

3. Ha a kérelemben feltüntetett cím pontatlan, vagy a kérelemben megnevezett címzett a jogsegély iránti kérelem teljesítése során nem található a megjelölt címen, a megkeresett Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága visszaküldi a kérelmet a megkereső Szerződő Félnek, vagy megteszi a szükséges intézkedéseket a cím hivatalból történő megállapítása iránt, feltéve, hogy az ehhez szükséges adatokkal rendelkezik.

4. E Megállapodás eltérő rendelkezése hiányában, a jogsegély iránti megkereséseket időben és gyorsan, a kérelem átvételétől számított százhúsz (120) napon belül kell teljesíteni. Indokolt késedelem esetén a megkeresett Szerződő Fél haladéktalanul tájékoztatja a megkereső Szerződő Felet.

8. Cikk

A jogsegély megtagadása és elhalasztása

1. Az e Megállapodás szerint előterjesztett megkeresés teljesítését a megkeresett Szerződő Fél megtagadhatja, ha megítélése szerint az sértené szuverenitását, közbiztonságát, közrendjét vagy jogrendszerének alapelveit, vagy a megkeresés teljesítése nem tartozik a megkeresett Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságainak feladatkörébe. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél a megkeresés átvételének időpontjától számított harminc (30) napon belül tájékoztatja a megkereső Szerződő Felet a teljesítés megtagadásának okáról.

2. A jogsegély iránti megkeresés teljesítését el lehet halasztani, ha a megkeresett Szerződő Fél megítélése szerint a kérelem azonnali teljesítése akadályozhat a megkeresett Szerződő Fél területén folyamatban lévő eljárást. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél a kérelem kézhezvételétől számított harminc (30) napon belül tájékoztatja a megkereső Szerződő Felet a halasztás okairól és annak várható időtartamáról.

9. Cikk

A jogsegély költségei

1. A Szerződő Felek a jogsegélyt díjmentesen nyújtják egymás számára, kivéve az alábbi eseteket:

a) a tanúval és szakértővel kapcsolatos költségekre e Megállapodás 14. és 15. cikke vonatkozik;

b) a szakértő vagy a tolmács költségei az e Megállapodás 13. cikkében előírt bizonyításfelvételi kérelem teljesítésével kapcsolatban, ha a szakértő vagy tolmács nem köztisztviselő. Ilyen esetekben a Szerződő Felek konzultálnak egymással a költségek megállapítása érdekében;

c) a Szerződő Felek bíróságai által hozott határozatok és választottbírósági határozatok elismeréséhez és végrehajtásához kapcsolódó költségek;

d) az iratok kézbesítésének a polgári és kereskedelmi ügyekben a bírósági és bíróságon kívüli iratok külföldön történő kézbesítéséről szóló, 1965. november 15-én Hágában kelt Egyezmény (a továbbiakban: Hágai Kézbesítési Egyezmény) 12. cikke szerinti költségei;

e) rendkívüli vagy különös kiadások, ha a megkereső Szerződő Fél a megkeresés különös eljárás útján történő teljesítését kéri.

2. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél az e Cikk szerinti költségek előlegezését és megtérítését a megkeresett Szerződő Fél jogával összhangban igényelheti.

MÁSODIK RÉSZ

JOGSEGÉLYRE VONATKOZÓ ELJÁRÁS

10. Cikk

Iratok kézbesítése

1. Az iratok kézbesítése iránti kérelmet írásban kell elkészíteni, és annak a következő adatokat kell tartalmaznia:

a) a kérelem kiállításának helye és ideje;

b) a megkereső hatóság teljes neve, címe és egyéb kapcsolattartási adatai, beleértve a telefon- és faxszámot, valamint az e-mail címet;

c) a megkeresett hatóság teljes neve, címe és egyéb kapcsolattartási adatai (ha ismert);

d) a kézbesítendő iratok listája;

e) a címzett teljes neve, címe, és ha ismert: neme, állampolgársága, foglalkozása, születési helye valamint képviselőjének neve és címe;

f) az ügy jellegéről való tájékoztatás;

g) a kérelmezett, iratkézbesítésre irányuló különös eljárás leírása (ha van ilyen).

2. A kérelmet és a kézbesítendő iratokat két (2) példányban kell megküldeni.

3. Ha az e Cikk szerinti kézbesítés nem foganatosítható kellő időben ahhoz, hogy a címzett a védelméről gondoskodhasson, a megkeresett Szerződő Fél megtagadhatja a kérelem teljesítését.

4. Az 5. cikk 2. bekezdésétől eltérően, ha a kézbesítendő iratokhoz nem csatoltak a megkeresett Szerződő Fél hivatalos nyelvén készült hiteles fordítást, vagy az iratok nem e nyelven készültek, azokat csak akkor lehet a címzett részére kézbesíteni, ha a címzett azokat önként elfogadja.

5. A Szerződő Felek, ha a jogi és technikai feltételek mindkét Szerződő Fél tekintetében lehetővé teszik, kérhetik az elektronikus úton történő kézbesítést (e-kézbesítés).

6. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél az iratok kézbesítése után megküldi a megkereső Szerződő Félnek a kézbesítést igazoló tanúsítványt vagy más iratokat, vagy értesíti a megkereső Szerződő Felet azokról az okokról, amelyek megakadályozták az iratok kézbesítése iránti kérelem teljes vagy részleges teljesítését. A tanúsítvány vagy egyéb okiratok másolata kérelemre faxon vagy e-mailben is elküldhető az eredeti postai úton történő megküldését megelőzően.

7. A Szerződő Felek hatóságai postai úton is kézbesíthetnek iratokat a másik Szerződő Fél területén tartózkodó személyek részére, szabályszerű kézbesítésre azonban csak az alábbi feltételek fennállása esetén kerülhet sor:

a) az iratot tértivevényes ajánlott küldeményként adták fel, és

b) az irathoz a kézbesítés helye szerinti Szerződő Fél hivatalos nyelvén készült hiteles fordítást csatoltak, kivéve, ha a címzett a küldő Szerződő Fél állampolgára, és

c) az iratot a címzett önként átvette és az átvételt aláírásával igazolta, és

d) az iratkézbesítés kellő időben történik ahhoz, hogy a címzett a védelméről gondoskodhasson.

11. Cikk

Iratok kézbesítése a Hágai Kézbesítési Egyezmény szerint

A 10. Cikk ellenére a Szerződő Felek alkalmazhatják a Hágai Kézbesítési Egyezményt.

12. Cikk

Bizonyításfelvétel

1. A bizonyításfelvétel körébe tartozik különösen a fizikai bizonyítékok vagy okiratok megküldése; a felek, tanúk, szakértők és más személyek meghallgatása; szemlék lefolytatása.

2. A jogsegély iránti megkeresést azon hatóság készíti el, amelynek eljárásában a jogsegély szükségessége felmerül, és annak a következő adatokat kell tartalmaznia:

a) a megkereső és, amennyiben ismert, a megkeresett hatóság megjelölése;

b) az ügy megjelölése, beleértve annak tárgyát és jellegét, és az ügy tényállásának rövid bemutatását, valamint az eljárásban érintett felek és esetleges jogi képviselőik nevét;

c) azoknak a személyeknek a teljes neve, lakcíme illetve tartózkodási helye, és amennyiben ismert, a személyazonosító igazolvány (állampolgári igazolvány), útlevél száma, szükség esetén állampolgársága, foglalkozása és egyéb adatai, akikre a megkeresés vonatkozik, és esetleges jogi képviselőjük; vagy jogi személy esetén annak teljes neve, bejegyzett címe vagy a központi ügyintézés helye;

d) a megkeresés célja, összefoglalása és a megkeresés teljesítéséhez szükséges adatok, ideértve a meghallgatandó személyekhez vagy szervezetekhez intézendő kérdéseket; megvizsgálandó iratok vagy tárgyak; a szükséges intézkedések (ha szükséges).

13. Cikk

A bizonyításfelvételre irányuló megkeresés elintézése

1. A megkereső hatóság kérésére a megkeresett hatóság kellő időben közli a jogsegély teljesítésének helyét és idejét.

2. Ha a jogi és technikai feltételek a megkeresett Szerződő Fél tekintetében lehetővé teszik, a bizonyításfelvételre irányuló megkeresés magában foglalja a valamely Szerződő Fél területén lakóhellyel rendelkező személy lakcímének megállapítását, akivel szemben a másik Szerződő Fél területén lakóhellyel vagy tartózkodási hellyel rendelkező személy az 1. cikk 2. bekezdésének hatálya alá tartozó ügyben követelést terjeszt elő, továbbá azon személy munkahelyének és jövedelme összegének megállapítását, akivel szemben tartásdíj iránti kérelmet nyújtottak be. Az ilyen kérelmek teljesítésének megkönnyítése érdekében a megkereső Szerződő Fél tájékoztatást ad az ügyben rendelkezésre álló valamennyi adatról.

3. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél írásban tájékoztatja a megkereső Szerződő Felet a megkeresés teljesítésének eredményéről, csatolja a kért bizonyítékokat és a kapcsolódó iratokat, vagy a közli a teljesítés akadályát.

14. Cikk

Tanúk és szakértők idézése

1. A másik Szerződő Fél területén tartózkodó tanú vagy szakértő megjelenése önkéntes, a meg nem jelenő tanúval vagy szakértővel szemben semmilyen kényszerítő eszköz nem alkalmazható.

2. Az idézést legalább kilencven (90) nappal azon nap előtt kell kézbesíteni a tanúnak vagy szakértőnek, amelyen meg kell jelennie a megkereső Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága előtt.

3. Az idézésben a tanút vagy szakértőt tájékoztatni kell a jogairól és kötelezettségeiről, költségei, díja előlegezésének és megtérítésének feltételeiről és a kifizetés módjáról. Az idézésben kényszerítő eszköz alkalmazása a tanúval vagy szakértővel szemben nem helyezhető kilátásba.

4. Ha lehetséges, a megkeresett Szerződő Fél tájékoztatja a megkereső Szerződő Felet arról, hogy az idézett személy eleget kíván-e a tenni az idézésnek.

15. Cikk

A tanúk és szakértők védelme és költségei

1. Az a másik Szerződő Fél területéről a 12. Cikknek megfelelően idézett tanú vagy szakértő, aki megjelenik a megkereső Szerződő Fél hatósága előtt, e Szerződő Fél területén nem vonható büntetőeljárás hatálya alá, nem tartóztatható le, nem vethető alá az egyéni szabadságát érintő bármiféle korlátozásnak olyan cselekményekért vagy olyan büntetőítéletek alapján, amelyek elkövetésére a megkereső állam területére való belépését megelőzően került sor.

2. Az e Cikk 1. bekezdése szerinti védelem megszűnik attól a naptól számított 15 nap után, amelyen a megkereső Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága írásban hivatalosan közölte a tanúval vagy a szakértővel, hogy további jelenlétére nincs szükség, ha az a megkereső Szerződő Fél területét nem hagyta el, vagy azt elhagyta ugyan, de oda visszatért. Ebbe a 15 napos időtartamba nem számít bele az az idő, mely alatt a tanú vagy szakértő a megkereső Szerződő Fél területét rajta kívül álló okból nem tudta elhagyni.

3. A tanú vagy a szakértő igényelheti utazási és tartózkodási költségeinek megtérítését, valamint díjazást igényelhet. Ezek a költségek a megkereső Szerződő Felet terhelik. A tartózkodási költségeket és díjazást legalább azon összegekkel azonos mértékben kell megállapítani, amelyeket azon Szerződő Félnél hatályban levő díjtáblázatok és rendelkezések állapítanak meg, ahol a meghallgatást foganatosítani kell. A tanú vagy a szakértő számára kérelmére előlegezni kell az utazási és tartózkodási költségek egészét vagy azok egy részét.

4. A megkereső Szerződő fél megkönnyíti a tanúnak vagy szakértőnek a megkereső Szerződő Fél területére történő belépését és ott tartózkodását a nemzeti jogával összhangban.

16. Cikk

Személyállapoti okiratok megküldése

1. Mindegyik Szerződő Fél, a 3. Cikk szerinti megkeresés alapján, a másik Szerződő Fél részére megküldi az utóbbi állampolgárainak személyállapotára vonatkozó, a megkereső Szerződő Fél joga szerint előírt okiratokat (bírósági határozatok, anyakönyvi kivonatok, ezek hiteles másolatai).

2. Az 1. bekezdésben említett okiratokat a másik Szerződő Félnek fordítás nélkül kell megküldeni, a 3. Cikkel összhangban.

17. Cikk

Jogról való tájékoztatás

1. A Szerződő Felek Központi Hatóságai kérelemre tájékoztatást nyújtanak államaik jogszabályairól valamint a bíróságok által követett joggyakorlatról.

2. Ha valamely polgári ügyben eljáró hatóság előtt folyamatban lévő ügy eldöntéséhez szükséges a megkeresett Szerződő Fél jogáról történő tájékoztatás, a megkeresett Szerződő Fél Központi Hatósága a megkereső hatóság 3. Cikk alapján továbbított kérelme alapján tájékoztatást nyújt jogszabályairól és a bíróságok által követett joggyakorlatról.

3. A 2. bekezdés szerinti kérelemnek az alábbiakat kell tartalmaznia:

a) a megkereső hatóság teljes neve;

b) az ügy rövid leírása, illetve azon további információk megjelölése, amelyek a válaszadást segíthetik;

c) azon kérdések, amelyekre vonatkozóan a megkeresett Szerződő Fél jogáról való tájékoztatásra szükség van.

4. A megkeresett Szerződő Fél a tájékoztatást a hivatalos nyelvén, vagy amennyiben lehetséges, angolul biztosítja.

HARMADIK RÉSZ

ELJÁRÁSJOGI RENDELKEZÉSEK

18. Cikk

Perköltségbiztosíték alóli mentesség

Az egyik Szerződő Fél állampolgára, aki a Szerződő Felek egyikének területén lakóhellyel vagy tartózkodási hellyel rendelkezik, a másik Szerződő Fél területén nem kötelezhető perköltségbiztosíték vagy bármely más biztosíték letételére azért, mert külföldi, vagy, mert nincs lakóhelye, tartózkodási helye annak a Szerződő Félnek a területén, amelynek hatósága előtt fellép.

19. Cikk

Jogi segítségnyújtásra, költségkedvezményekre való jogosultság

Az egyik Szerződő Fél polgárai a másik Szerződő Fél területén ugyanolyan feltételekkel és ugyanolyan mértékben jogosultak az eljárások vonatkozásában jogi segítségnyújtásra és költségkedvezményekre, mint a másik Szerződő Fél állampolgáraira.

20. Cikk

Jogi segítségnyújtás és költségkedvezmény iránti kérelem

1. Bármelyik Szerződő fél állampolgára kérelmezheti a 19. Cikk szerinti jogi segítségnyújtást illetve a költségkedvezményt.

2. A kérelmet elő lehet terjeszteni

a) közvetlenül azon Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságánál, amelynek területén a jogi segítségnyújtást illetve a költségkedvezményt igénylik; vagy

b) azon Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságán keresztül, amelynek a kérelmező állampolgára; ez a hatóság a 3. Cikk 1. bekezdésével összhangban továbbítja a kérelmet és annak mellékleteit azon Szerződő Fél illetékes hatóságához, amelynek területén a jogi segélynyújtást illetve a költségkedvezményt igénylik.

3. A kérelmet és mellékleteit annak a Szerződő Félnek a nyelvén készült hiteles fordítással kell ellátni, amelynek a területén a jogi segítségnyújtást és a költségkedvezményt igénylik.

4. A kérelmet elbíráló hatóság, ha szükségesnek tartja, kiegészítő információkat kérhet a kérelmezőtől.

NEGYEDIK RÉSZ

HATÁROZATOK ELISMERÉSE ÉS VÉGREHAJTÁSA

21. Cikk

A határozatok elismerésére és végrehajtására vonatkozó általános rendelkezések

1. E Rész rendelkezései nem alkalmazhatóak a fizetésképtelenséggel kapcsolatos eljárásokban hozott határozatokra.

2. E Rész alkalmazásában „határozat” alatt a valamely Szerződő Fél hatósága által polgári ügyben hozott, jogerős ítéletet vagy más határozatot kell érteni, függetlenül a határozat elnevezésétől. E fogalom-meghatározás magába foglalja különösen a büntető- és közigazgatási ügyekben előterjesztett polgári jogi igények tekintetében hozott határozatokat, valamint a személyállapoti, házassági, családjogi, öröklési vagy kereskedelmi ügyekben hozott bíróságon kívüli határozatokat.

22. Cikk

A határozatok elismerése és végrehajtása

1. Az egyik Szerződő Fél hatóságának a személyállapot és a házasság felbontása vagy érvénytelenítése tárgyában hozott határozatát a másik Szerződő Fél területén minden további eljárás nélkül el kell ismerni. E rendelkezés nem akadályozza, hogy bármely érdekelt személy a másik Szerződő Fél bíróságától e másik Szerződő Fél jogával összhangban annak megállapítását kérje, hogy a határozat e másik Szerződő Fél területén elismerhető vagy nem ismerhető el.

2. A valamely Szerződő Fél hatósága által hozott olyan határozatot, amelyre az 1. bekezdés nem terjed ki, azon Szerződő Fél eljárási jogával összhangban kell elismerni, amelynek területén az elismerést kérik.

3. Az egyik Szerződő Fél által az 1. vagy 2. bekezdés alapján elismert határozat az elismerés helye szerinti Szerződő Fél területén a határozatot hozó Szerződő Fél joga szerinti joghatásokkal bír.

4. Az e Cikk 2. bekezdése szerint elismert, a határozatot hozó Szerződő Fél joga szerint végrehajtható határozatot annak a Szerződő Félnek a joga alapján kell végrehajtani, amelynek a területén a végrehajtást kérik.

23. Cikk

A határozatok elismerésének és végrehajtásának megtagadása

1. A határozatok 22. Cikk szerinti elismerését és végrehajtását meg kell tagadni, ha:

a) azon Szerződő Fél hatóságának, amely a határozatot hozta, azon Szerződő Fél joga szerint, amelynek területén a határozat elismerését és végrehajtását kérik, nem volt joghatósága az ügy elbírálására;

b) az alperes vagy az a személy, aki ellen a végrehajtani kért határozatot hozták, azért nem vett részt az eljárásban, mert részére az eljárást megindító iratot nem kézbesítették szabályszerűen és kellő időben ahhoz, hogy védekezését előkészíthesse;

c) ugyanazon felek között, ugyanabból a ténybeli alapból származó ugyanazon jog iránt annak a Szerződő Félnek a hatósága előtt, amelynek a területén a határozat elismerését és végrehajtását kérik, korábban indult eljárás, mint a határozatot hozó Szerződő Fél hatósága előtt;

d) ugyanazon felek között, ugyanabból a ténybeli alapból származó ugyanazon jog tárgyában annak a Szerződő Félnek a hatósága korábban hozott jogerős határozatot, amelynek a területén a határozat elismerését és végrehajtását kérik;

e) ugyanazon felek között, ugyanabból a ténybeli alapból származó ugyanazon jog tárgyában harmadik államban korábban hoztak olyan jogerős határozatot, amely annak a Szerződő Félnek a területén, amelyben a határozat elismerését és végrehajtását kérik, elismerhető és végrehajtható;

f) a határozat elismerése vagy végrehajtása sérti azon Szerződő Fél közrendjét, amelynek területén az elismerést és végrehajtást kérik.

2. Ha személyállapoti és családjogi ügyekben valamely Szerződő Fél joga szerint a joghatóságot az állampolgárság alapozza meg, a mindkét Szerződő Fél állampolgárságával rendelkező személy mindkét állampolgárságát figyelembe kell venni az 1. bekezdés a) pontjának alkalmazása során.

24. Cikk

A nemzeti jog alkalmazása a határozatok elismerésére és végrehajtására

Ha az egyik Szerződő Fél hatósága által hozott határozat e Megállapodás rendelkezései alapján nem ismerhető vagy nem hajtható végre a másik Szerződő Fél területén, a Megállapodás nem akadályozza, hogy a határozat elismerésére és végrehajtására ez utóbbi Szerződő Fél belső joga alapján sor kerüljön.

25. Cikk

A határozat elismerésére, végrehajtására irányuló kérelem

1. A határozat elismerésére vagy végrehajtására vonatkozó kérelmet közvetlenül annak a Szerződő Félnek az illetékes hatósága előtt lehet előterjeszteni, amelynek területén ez elismerést vagy végrehajtást kérik.

2. A kérelem előterjeszthető annál a hatóságnál is, amely az ügyben első fokon hozott határozatot; ebben az esetben a kérelmet a Központi Hatóságok útján kell a másik Szerződő Fél hatóságának megküldeni; ugyanakkor a Központi Hatóságok feladata kizárólag a kérelem és mellékleteinek megküldésére korlátozódik.

3. A kérelemnek tartalmaznia kell az alábbi adatokat:

(a) a kérelmező neve és címe, illetve adott esetben a kérelmező jogi képviselőjének neve és címe;

(b) az ellenérdekű fél neve és címe, illetve adott esetben az ellenérdekű fél jogi képviselőjének neve és címe;

(c) adott esetben az ellenérdekű félnek a végrehajtás szerinti Szerződő Fél területén fekvő vagyonára vonatkozó információ;

(d) minden olyan kiegészítő adat, amely megkönnyíti az elismerésről vagy végrehajtásról való döntést.

4. A kérelemhez mellékelni kell:

a) a határozatot vagy hitelesített másolatát;

b) a határozat jogerejét és végrehajthatóságát tanúsító igazolást, kivéve, ha ez magából a határozatból kitűnik;

c) igazolást arról, hogy az eljárásban részt nem vett pervesztes fél részére az eljárást megindító iratot szabályszerűen és kellő időben kézbesítették;

d) a kérelem, továbbá az a)-c) pontokban említett okiratok hiteles fordítását annak a Szerződő Félnek a nyelvére, amelynek területén a határozatot elismerését vagy végrehajtását kérik.

26. Cikk

A határozatok elismerésével vagy végrehajtásával kapcsolatos eljárások

1. A határozatok elismerésére vagy végrehajtására vonatkozó eljárásokra az e Megállapodásban nem szabályozott kérdésekben a megkeresett Szerződő Fél nemzeti joga alkalmazandó.

2. A másik Szerződő Fél hatósága által hozott határozat érdemben nem vizsgálható felül. Az elismerés vagy végrehajtás iránti kérelemről döntő bíróság csak annak megállapítására szorítkozik, hogy az elismerésnek vagy végrehajtásnak az e Részben meghatározott feltételei fennállnak-e.

3. A kötelezett a határozat végrehajtása ellen felhozhatja annak a Szerződő Félnek a joga által lehetővé tett kifogásokat, amelynek hatósága a végrehajtásról döntött.

27. Cikk

Egyezségek

E Rész rendelkezéseit a hatóság által jóváhagyott egyezségekre is megfelelően alkalmazni kell.

28. Cikk

Választottbírósági határozatok elismerése és végrehajtása

Az egyik Szerződő Fél területén hozott választottbírósági határozat másik Szerződő Fél területén történő elismerésére és végrehajtására a külföldi választottbírósági határozatok elismeréséről és végrehajtásáról szóló, New Yorkban, 1958. évi június hó 10. napján kelt egyezmény alkalmazandó.

ÖTÖDIK RÉSZ

ÁTMENETI ÉS ZÁRÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

29. Cikk

Más nemzetközi megállapodásokkal való viszony

1. E Megállapodás rendelkezései nem érintik a Szerződő Felek más olyan nemzetközi szerződésekből eredő jogait és kötelezettségeit, amelyeknek mindkét Szerződő Fél Részese.

2. E Megállapodás nem érinti Magyarországnak az Európai Unióban fennálló tagságából eredő kötelezettségeit, ideértve jövőbeli kötelezettségeit is.

30. Cikk

Átmeneti rendelkezések

1. E Megállapodás 21-27. Cikkeit a Megállapodás hatálybalépése előtt, de nem 1986. február 16. napja előtt hozott határozatok és jóváhagyott egyezségek elismerésére és végrehajtására is alkalmazni kell.

2. A polgári, a családjogi és a bűnügyi jogsegély tárgyában Hanoiban, 1985. január 18-án aláírt Szerződést kell alkalmazni az e Megállapodás hatálybalépésének időpontját megelőzően küldött, de a megkeresett Szerződő Fél által ezen időpontig még nem teljesített jogsegély iránti megkeresésekre.

31. Cikk

Vitás kérdések rendezése, egyeztetések

1. A Megállapodás alkalmazásával, értelmezésével és végrehajtásával összefüggésben felmerült vitás kérdéseket a Szerződő Felek Központi Hatóságukon keresztül folytatott tárgyalások útján rendezik.

2. A Szerződő Felek a közöttük meglévő együttműködési mechanizmusok keretében biztosítják az e Megállapodás végrehajtásával kapcsolatos álláspontok és vélemények cseréjét.

3. A Szerződő Felek háromévenként felülvizsgálják és értékelik a Megállapodás végrehajtását.

32. Cikk

Megerősítés és hatálybalépés

1. E Megállapodást a Szerződő Felek nemzeti jogszabályi rendelkezéseinek megfelelően meg kell erősíteni. A Megállapodás attól a naptól számított harmincadik napon lép hatályba, hogy a Szerződő Felekhez az általuk diplomáciai úton küldött utolsó írásos értesítés is megérkezett arról, hogy a Megállapodás megerősítése befejeződött.

2. E Megállapodás határozatlan ideig marad hatályban.

3. A Megállapodás hatálybalépésével a polgári, a családjogi és a bűnügyi jogsegély tárgyában, Hanoiban, 1985. január 18-án aláírt Szerződés hatályát veszti.

4. E Megállapodást diplomáciai úton megküldött írásbeli értesítéssel bármelyik Szerződő Fél felmondhatja. A felmondás a másik Szerződő Fél általi kézhezvétel napjától számított hat hónap elteltével lép hatályba.

5. A Megállapodás felmondása esetén a felmondás előtt megérkezett jogsegély iránti megkeresések e Megállapodás rendelkezései szerint kerülnek teljesítésre.

FENTIEK HITELÉÜL, a saját nemzeti joguk szerint kellően meghatalmazott alulírottak aláírják ezen Egyezményt.

Készült Budapesten, 2018. szeptember 10-én két eredeti példányban magyar, vietnami és angol nyelven. Mindhárom nyelvi változat egyaránt hiteles. Ellentmondás vagy eltérő értelmezés esetén az angol nyelvű szöveg irányadó.”

4. § A Megállapodás 3. Cikk 2. bekezdése szerinti Központi Hatóságként az igazságügyért felelős miniszter kerül kijelölésre.

5. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2-4. § és a 7. § a Megállapodás 32. Cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Megállapodás, illetve a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter - annak ismertté válását követően - a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

6. § Az e törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről az igazságügyért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.

7. § Hatályát veszti a Magyar Népköztársaság és a Vietnami Szocialista Köztársaság között a polgári, a családjogi és a bűnügyi jogsegély tárgyában Hanoiban 1985. évi január hó 18. napján aláírt szerződés kihirdetéséről szóló 1986. évi 8. törvényerejű rendelet.