2006. évi LXXXI. törvény

az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt Egyezményéhez kapcsolódó, az orvosbiológiai kutatásokról szóló, Genfben, 2005. szeptember 28-án aláírt Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt Egyezményéhez kapcsolódó, az orvosbiológiai kutatásokról szóló, Genfben, 2005. szeptember 28-án aláírt Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv hiteles angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„Additional Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, concerning Biomedical Research

Preamble

The member States of the Council of Europe, the other States and the European Community signatories to this Additional Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine (hereinafter referred to as „the Convention”),

Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is the achievement of greater unity between its members and that one of the methods by which this aim is pursued is the maintenance and further realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms;

Considering that the aim of the Convention, as defined in Article 1, is to protect the dignity and identity of all human beings and guarantee everyone, without discrimination, respect for their integrity and other rights and fundamental freedoms with regard to the application of biology and medicine;

Considering that progress in medical and biological sciences, in particular advances obtained through biomedical research, contributes to saving lives and improving quality of life;

Conscious of the fact that the advancement of biomedical science and practice is dependent on knowledge and discovery which necessitates research on human beings;

Stressing that such research is often transdisciplinary and international;

Taking into account national and international professional standards in the field of biomedical research and the previous work of the Committee of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in this field;

Convinced that biomedical research that is contrary to human dignity and human rights should never be carried out;

Stressing the paramount concern to be the protection of the human being participating in research;

Affirming that particular protection shall be given to human beings who may be vulnerable in the context of research;

Recognising that every person has a right to accept or refuse to undergo biomedical research and that no one should be forced to undergo such research;

Resolving to take such measures as are necessary to safeguard human dignity and the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual with regard to biomedical research,

Have agreed as follows:

Chapter I

OBJECT AND SCOPE

Article 1

Object and purpose

Parties to this Protocol shall protect the dignity and identity of all human beings and guarantee everyone, without discrimination, respect for their integrity and other rights and fundamental freedoms with regard to any research involving interventions on human beings in the field of biomedicine.

Article 2

Scope

1. This Protocol covers the full range of research activities in the health field involving interventions on human beings.

2. This Protocol does not apply to research on embryos in vitro. It does apply to research on foetuses and embryos in vivo.

3. For the purposes of this Protocol, the term intervention” includes:

i. a physical intervention, and

ii. any other intervention in so far as it involves a risk to the psychological health of the person concerned.

Chapter II

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 3

Primacy of the human being

The interests and welfare of the human being participating in research shall prevail over the sole interest of society or science.

Article 4

General rule

Research shall be carried out freely, subject to the provisions of this Protocol and the other legal provisions ensuring the protection of the human being.

Article 5

Absence of alternatives

Research on human beings may only be undertaken if there is no alternative of comparable effectiveness.

Article 6

Risks and benefits

1. Research shall not involve risks and burdens to the human being disproportionate to its potential benefits.

2. In addition, where the research does not have the potential to produce results of direct benefit to the health of the research participant, such research may only be undertaken if the research entails no more than acceptable risk and acceptable burden for the research participant. This shall be without prejudice to the provision contained in Article 15 paragraph 2, sub-paragraph ii for the protection of persons not able to consent to research.

Article 7

Approval

Research may only be undertaken if the research project has been approved by the competent body after independent examination of its scientific merit, including assessment of the importance of the aim of research, and multidisciplinary review of its ethical acceptability.

Article 8

Scientific quality

Any research must be scientifically justified, meet generally accepted criteria of scientific quality and be carried out in accordance with relevant professional obligations and standards under the supervision of an appropriately qualified researcher.

Chapter III

ETHICS COMMITTEE

Article 9

Independent examination by an ethics committee

1. Every research project shall be submitted for independent examination of its ethical acceptability to an ethics committee. Such projects shall be submitted to independent examination in each State in which any research activity is to take place.

2. The purpose of the multidisciplinary examination of the ethical acceptability of the research project shall be to protect the dignity, rights, safety and well-being of research participants. The assessment of the ethical acceptability shall draw on an appropriate range of expertise and experience adequately reflecting professional and lay views.

3. The ethics committee shall produce an opinion containing reasons for its conclusion.

Article 10

Independence of the ethics committee

1. Parties to this Protocol shall take measures to assure the independence of the ethics committee. That body shall not be subject to undue external influences.

2. Members of the ethics committee shall declare all circumstances that might lead to a conflict of interest. Should such conflicts arise, those involved shall not participate in that review.

Article 11

Information for the ethics committee

1. All information which is necessary for the ethical assessment of the research project shall be given in written form to the ethics committee.

2. In particular, information on items contained in the appendix to this Protocol shall be provided, in so far as it is relevant for the research project. The appendix may be amended by the Committee set up by Article 32 of the Convention by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast.

Article 12

Undue influence

The ethics committee must be satisfied that no undue influence, including that of a financial nature, will be exerted on persons to participate in research. In this respect, particular attention must be given to vulnerable or dependent persons.

Chapter IV

INFORMATION AND CONSENT

Article 13

Information for research participants

1. The persons being asked to participate in a research project shall be given adequate information in a comprehensible form. This information shall be documented.

2. The information shall cover the purpose, the overall plan and the possible risks and benefits of the research project, and include the opinion of the ethics committee. Before being asked to consent to participate in a research project, the persons concerned shall be specifically informed, according to the nature and purpose of the research:

i. of the nature, extent and duration of the procedures involved, in particular, details of any burden imposed by the research project;

ii. of available preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic procedures;

iii. of the arrangements for responding to adverse events or the concerns of research participants;

iv. of arrangements to ensure respect for private life and ensure the confidentiality of personal data;

v. of arrangements for access to information relevant to the participant arising from the research and to its overall results;

vi. of the arrangements for fair compensation in the case of damage;

vii. of any foreseen potential further uses, including commercial uses, of the research results, data or biological materials;

viii. of the source of funding of the research project.

3. In addition, the persons being asked to participate in a research project shall be informed of the rights and safeguards prescribed by law for their protection, and specifically of their right to refuse consent or to withdraw consent at any time without being subject to any form of discrimination, in particular regarding the right to medical care.

Article 14

Consent

1. No research on a person may be carried out, subject to the provisions of both Chapter V and Article 19, without the informed, free, express, specific and documented consent of the person. Such consent may be freely withdrawn by the person at any phase of the research.

2. Refusal to give consent or the withdrawal of consent to participation in research shall not lead to any form of discrimination against the person concerned, in particular regarding the right to medical care.

3. Where the capacity of the person to give informed consent is in doubt, arrangements shall be in place to verify whether or not the person has such capacity.

Chapter V

PROTECTION OF PERSONS NOT ABLE TO CONSENT TO RESEARCH

Article 15

Protection of persons not able to consent to research

1. Research on a person without the capacity to consent to research may be undertaken only if all the following specific conditions are met:

1. the results of the research have the potential to produce real and direct benefit to his or her health;

ii. research of comparable effectiveness cannot be carried out on individuals capable of giving consent;

iii. the person undergoing research has been informed of his or her rights and the safeguards prescribed by law for his or her protection, unless this person is not in a state to receive the information;

iv. the necessary authorisation has been given specifically and in writing by the legal representative or an authority, person or body provided for by law, and after having received the information required by Article 16, taking into account the person’s previously expressed wishes or objections. An adult not able to consent shall as far as possible take part in the authorisation procedure. The opinion of a minor shall be taken into consideration as an increasingly determining factor in proportion to age and degree of maturity;

v. the person concerned does not object.

2. Exceptionally and under the protective conditions prescribed by law, where the research has not the potential to produce results of direct benefit to the health of the person concerned, such research may be authorised subject to the conditions laid down in paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs ii, iii, iv, and v above, and to the following additional conditions:

i. the research has the aim of contributing, through significant improvement in the scientific understanding of the individual's condition, disease or disorder, to the ultimate attainment of results capable of conferring benefit to the person concerned or to other persons in the same age category or afflicted with the same disease or disorder or having the same condition;

ii. the research entails only minimal risk and minimal burden for the individual concerned; and any consideration of additional potential benefits of the research shall not be used to justify an increased level of risk or burden.

3. Objection to participation, refusal to give authorisation or the withdrawal of authorisation to participate in research shall not lead to any form of discrimination against the person concerned, in particular regarding the right to medical care.

Article 16

Information prior to authorisation

1. Those being asked to authorise participation of a person in a research project shall be given adequate information in a comprehensible form. This information shall be documented.

2. The information shall cover the purpose, the overall plan and the possible risks and benefits of the research project, and include the opinion of the ethics committee. They shall further be informed of the rights and safeguards prescribed by law for the protection of those not able to consent to research and specifically of the right to refuse or to withdraw authorisation at any time, without the person concerned being subject to any form of discrimination, in particular regarding the right to medical care. They shall be specifically informed according to the nature and purpose of the research of the items of information listed in Article 13.

3. The information shall also be provided to the individual concerned, unless this person is not in a state to receive the information.

Article 17

Research with minimal risk and minimal burden

1. For the purposes of this Protocol it is deemed that the research bears a minimal risk if, having regard to the nature and scale of the intervention, it is to be expected that it will result, at the most, in a very slight and temporary negative impact on the health of the person concerned.

2. It is deemed that it bears a minimal burden if it is to be expected that the discomfort will be, at the most, temporary and very slight for the person concerned. In assessing the burden for an individual, a person enjoying the special confidence of the person concerned shall assess the burden where appropriate.

Chapter VI

SPECIFIC SITUATIONS

Article 18

Research during pregnancy or breastfeeding

1. Research on a pregnant woman which does not have the potential to produce results of direct benefit to her health, or to that of her embryo, foetus or child after birth, may only be undertaken if the following additional conditions are met:

i. the research has the aim of contributing to the ultimate attainment of results capable of conferring benefit to other women in relation to reproduction or to other embryos, foetuses or children;

ii. research of comparable effectiveness cannot be carried out on women who are not pregnant;

iii. the research entails only minimal risk and minimal burden.

2. Where research is undertaken on a breastfeeding woman, particular care shall be taken to avoid any adverse impact on the health of the child.

Article 19

Research on persons in emergency clinical situations

1. The law shall determine whether, and under which protective additional conditions, research in emergency situations may take place when:

i. a person is not in a state to give consent, and

ii. because of the urgency of the situation, it is impossible to obtain in a sufficiently timely manner, authorisation from his or her representative or an authority or a person or body which would in the absence of an emergency situation be called upon to give authorisation.

2. The law shall include the following specific conditions:

i. research of comparable effectiveness cannot be carried out on persons in non-emergency situations;

ii. the research project may only be undertaken if it has been approved specifically for emergency situations by the competent body;

iii. any relevant previously expressed objections of the person known to the researcher shall be respected;

iv. where the research has not the potential to produce results of direct benefit to the health of the person concerned, it has the aim of contributing, through significant improvement in the scientific understanding of the individual’s condition, disease or disorder, to the ultimate attainment of results capable of conferring benefit to the person concerned or to other persons in the same category or afflicted with the same disease or disorder or having the same condition, and entails only minimal risk and minimal burden.

3. Persons participating in the emergency research project or, if applicable, their representatives shall be provided with all the relevant information concerning their participation in the research project as soon as possible. Consent or authorisation for continued participation shall be requested as soon as reasonably possible.

Article 20

Research on persons deprived of liberty

Where the law allows research on persons deprived of liberty, such persons may participate in a research project in which the results do not have the potential to produce direct benefit to their health only if the following additional conditions are met:

i. research of comparable effectiveness cannot be carried out without the participation of persons deprived of liberty;

ii. the research has the aim of contributing to the ultimate attainment of results capable of conferring benefit to persons deprived of liberty;

iii. the research entails only minimal risk and minimal burden.

Chapter VII

SAFETY AND SUPERVISION

Article 21

Minimisation of risk and burden

1. All reasonable measures shall be taken to ensure safety and to minimise risk and burden for the research participants.

2. Research may only be carried out under the supervision of a clinical professional who possesses the necessary qualifications and experience.

Article 22

Assessment of health status

1. The researcher shall take all necessary steps to assess the state of health of human beings prior to their inclusion in research, to ensure that those at increased risk in relation to participation in a specific project be excluded.

2. The researcher shall take all necessary steps to assess the state of health of human beings prior to their inclusion in research, to ensure that those at increased risk in relation to participation in a specific project be excluded.

Article 23

Non-interference with necessary clinical interventions

1. Research shall not delay nor deprive participants of medically necessary preventive, diagnostic or therapeutic procedures.

2. In research associated with prevention, diagnosis or treatment, participants assigned to control groups shall be assured of proven methods of prevention, diagnosis or treatment.

3. The use of placebo is permissible where there are no methods of proven effectiveness, or where withdrawal or withholding of such methods does not present an unacceptable risk or burden.

Article 24

New developments

1. Parties to this Protocol shall take measures to ensure that the research project is re-examined if this is justified in the light of scientific developments or events arising in the course of the research.

2. The purpose of the re-examination is to establish whether:

i. the research needs to be discontinued or if changes to the research project are necessary for the research to continue;

ii. research participants, or if applicable their representatives, need to be informed of the developments or events;

iii. additional consent or authorisation for participation is required.

3. Any new information relevant to their participation shall be conveyed to the research participants, or, if applicable, to their representatives, in a timely manner.

4. The competent body shall be informed of the reasons for any premature termination of a research project.

Chapter VIII

CONFIDENTIALITY AND RIGHT TO INFORMATION

Article 25

Confidentiality

1. Any information of a personal nature collected during biomedical research shall be considered as confidential and treated according to the rules relating to the protection of private life.

2. The law shall protect against inappropriate disclosure of any other information related to a research project that has been submitted to an ethics committee in compliance with this Protocol.

Article 26

Right to information

1. Research participants shall be entitled to know any information collected on their health in conformity with the provisions of Article 10 of the Convention.

2. Other personal information collected for a research project will be accessible to them in conformity with the law on the protection of individuals with regard to processing of personal data.

Article 27

Duty of care

If research gives rise to information of relevance to the current or future health or quality of life of research participants, this information must be offered to them. That shall be done within a framework of health care or counselling. In communication of such information, due care must be taken in order to protect confidentiality and to respect any wish of a participant not to receive such information.

Article 28

Availability of results

1. On completion of the research, a report or summary shall be submitted to the ethics committee or the competent body.

2. The conclusions of the research shall be made available to participants in reasonable time, on request.

3. The researcher shall take appropriate measures to make public the results of research in reasonable time.

Chapter IX

RESEARCH IN STATES NOT PARTIES TO THIS PROTOCOL

Article 29

Research in States not parties to this Protocol

Sponsors or researchers within the jurisdiction of a Party to this Protocol that plan to undertake or direct a research project in a State not party to this Protocol shall ensure that, without prejudice to the provisions applicable in that State, the research project complies with the principles on which the provisions of this Protocol are based. Where necessary, the Party shall take appropriate measures to that end.

Chapter X

INFRINGEMENT OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE PROTOCOL

Article 30

Infringement of the rights or principles

The Parties shall provide appropriate judicial protection to prevent or to put a stop to an unlawful infringement of the rights or principles set forth in this Protocol at short notice.

Article 31

Compensation for damage

The person who has suffered damage as a result of participation in research shall be entitled to fair compensation according to the conditions and procedures prescribed by law.

Article 32

Sanctions

Parties shall provide for appropriate sanctions to be applied in the event of infringement of the provisions contained in this Protocol.

Chapter XI

RELATION BETWEEN THIS PROTOCOL AND OTHER PROVISIONS AND RE-EXAMINATION OF THE PROTOCOL

Article 33

Relation between this Protocol and the Convention

As between the Parties, the provisions of Articles 1 to 32 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional articles to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply accordingly.

Article 34

Wider protection

None of the provisions of this Protocol shall be interpreted as limiting or otherwise affecting the possibility for a Party to grant research participants a wider measure of protection than is stipulated in this Protocol.

Article 35

Re-examination of the Protocol

In order to monitor scientific developments, the present Protocol shall be examined within the Committee referred to in Article 32 of the Convention no later than five years from the entry into force of this Protocol and thereafter at such intervals as the Committee may determine.

Chapter XII

FINAL CLAUSES

Article 36

Signature and ratification

This Protocol shall be open for signature by Signatories to the Convention. It is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. A Signatory may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol unless it has previously or simultaneously ratified, accepted or approved the Convention. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

Article 37

Entry into force

1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date on which five States, including at least four member States of the Council of Europe, have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in accordance with the provisions of Article 36.

2. In respect of any State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval.

Article 38

Accession

1. After the entry into force of this Protocol, any State which has acceded to the Convention may also accede to this Protocol.

2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe of an instrument of accession which shall take effect on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of its deposit.

Article 39

Denunciation

1. Any Party may at any time denounce this Protocol by means of a notification addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

2. Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of three months after the date of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.

Article 40

Notifications

The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the Council of Europe, the European Community, any Signatory, any Party and any other State which has been invited to accede to the Protocol of:

a. any signature;

b. the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession;

c. any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance with Articles 37 and 38;

d. any other act, notification or communication relating to this Protocol.

In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto, have signed this Protocol.

Done at Strasbourg, this 25th day of January 2005, in English and in French, both texts being equally authentic, in a single copy which shall be deposited in the archives of the Council of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each member State of the Council of Europe, to the non-member States which have participated in the elaboration of this Protocol, to any State invited to accede to the Convention and to the European Community.

Appendix Information to be given to the ethics committee

Information on the following items shall be provided to the ethics committee, in so far as it is relevant for the research project:

Description of the project

i. the name of the principal researcher, qualifications and experience of researchers and, where appropriate, the clinically responsible person, and funding arrangements;

ii. the aim and justification for the research based on the latest state of scientific knowledge;

iii. methods and procedures envisaged, including statistical and other analytical techniques;

iv. a comprehensive summary of the research project in lay language;

v. a statement of previous and concurrent submissions of the research project for assessment or approval and the outcome of those submissions;

Participants, consent and information

vi. justification for involving human beings in the research project;

vii. the criteria for inclusion or exclusion of the categories of persons for participation in the research project and how those persons are to be selected and recruited;

viii. reasons for the use or the absence of control groups;

ix. a description of the nature and degree of foreseeable risks that may be incurred through participating in research;

x. the nature, extent and duration of the interventions to be carried out on the research participants, and details of any burden imposed by the research project;

xi. arrangements to monitor, evaluate and react to contingencies that may have consequences for the present or future health of research participants;

xii. the timing and details of information for those persons who would participate in the research project and the means proposed for provision of this information;

xiii. documentation intended to be used to seek consent or, in the case of persons not able to consent, authorisation for participation in the research project;

xiv. arrangements to ensure respect for the private life of those persons who would participate in research and ensure the confidentiality of personal data;

xv. arrangements foreseen for information which may be generated and be relevant to the present or future health of those persons who would participate in research and their family members;

Other information

xvi. details of all payments and rewards to be made in the context of the research project;

xvii. details of all circumstances that might lead to conflicts of interest that may affect the independent judgement of the researchers;

xviii. details of any foreseen potential further uses, including commercial uses, of the research results, data or biological materials;

xix. details of all other ethical issues, as perceived by the researcher;

xx. details of any insurance or indemnity to cover damage arising in the context of the research project.

The ethics committee may request additional information necessary for evaluation of the research project.”

„Az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló, Oviedóban, 1997. április 4-én kelt Egyezménye: Az emberi jogokról és a biomedicináról szóló Egyezmény orvosbiológiai kutatásokról szóló Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyve

Preambulum

Az Európa Tanács tagállamai, más Államok és az Európai Közösség, melyek az Európa Tanácsnak az emberi lény emberi jogainak és méltóságának a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazására tekintettel történő védelméről szóló Egyezményéhez (a továbbiakban: az Egyezmény) kapcsolódó, jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv aláírói

Tekintettel arra, hogy az Európa Tanács célja a tagjai közötti nagyobb egység megvalósítása, és hogy e cél elérésének egyik módja az emberi jogok és alapvető szabadságjogok védelme és további megvalósítása;

Tekintettel arra, hogy az Egyezmény célja az 1. cikk meghatározása szerint az emberi lény méltóságának és önazonosságának védelme, valamint annak megkülönböztetés nélküli biztosítása mindenki számára, hogy tiszteletben tartják sérthetetlenségét, más jogait és alapvető szabadságjogait a biológia és az orvostudomány alkalmazása vonatkozásában;

Tekintettel arra, hogy az orvosi és biológiai tudományok fejlődése, különösképpen az orvosbiológiai kutatás révén elért előrehaladás hozzájárul életek megmentéséhez és az életminőség javításához;

Tudatában annak a ténynek, hogy az orvosbiológiai tudomány és gyakorlat előbbre vitele ismeretektől és felfedezésektől függ, amelyek szükségessé teszik az embereken végzett kísérleteket;

Hangsúlyozva, hogy az ilyen kutatás gyakran több tudományágat felölelő és nemzetközi jellegű;

Figyelembe véve az orvosbiológiai kutatás terén meglévő nemzeti és nemzetközi szakmai szabványokat és az Európa Tanács Miniszteri Bizottságának és Parlamenti Közgyűlésének ezen a területen korábban végzett munkáját;

Attól a meggyőződéstől vezérelve, hogy az emberi méltósággal és az emberi jogokkal ellentétes orvosbiológiai kutatást soha sem szabad folytatni;

Hangsúlyozva a kutatásban részt vevő emberi lény védelmének elsőrendű fontosságát;

Megerősítve, hogy különleges védelemben kell részesíteni azokat az emberi lényeket, akik sérülékenyek és érdekeik védelmére képtelenek lehetnek a kutatás során;

Elismerve, hogy minden embernek jogában áll elfogadni vagy visszautasítani az orvosbiológiai kutatásban való részvételt, továbbá azt, hogy senkit sem lehet kényszeríteni ilyen kutatásban való részvételre;

Elhatározva, hogy megteszik mindazokat az intézkedéseket, amelyek az emberi méltóság és az egyén alapvető jogai és szabadságjogai védelméhez szükségesek az orvosbiológiai kutatással kapcsolatosan,

Az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

I. Fejezet

CÉL ÉS HATÁLY

1. cikk

Cél és szándék

A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvben Részes Felek védelemben részesítik minden emberi lény méltóságát és önazonosságát, és megkülönböztetés nélkül mindenki számára biztosítják sérthetetlenségének és más jogainak és alapvető szabadságjogainak tiszteletben tartását az emberi lényeken végzett beavatkozásokkal járó orvosbiológiai kutatások vonatkozásában.

2. cikk

Hatály

1. Jelen Jegyzőkönyv rendelkezéseit kell alkalmazni minden, az egészségügy területén emberi lényeken végzett beavatkozással járó kutatási tevékenységre.

2. A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv nem alkalmazandó az embriókon végzett in vitro kutatásra. A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv alkalmazandó a magzatokon és embriókon végzett in vivo kutatásra.

3. A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv alkalmazásában, a „beavatkozás” kifejezés magában foglalja

I. a fizikai beavatkozást és

II. minden egyéb beavatkozást, amennyiben az az érintett személy lelki egészségére nézve kockázattal jár.

II. Fejezet

ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

3. cikk

Az emberi lény elsőbbsége

A kutatásban részt vevő emberi lény érdeke és jóléte a társadalom vagy a tudomány puszta érdekével szemben elsőbbséget élvez.

4. cikk

Általános szabály

A kutatást szabadon kell végezni, a jelen Jegyzőkönyv rendelkezéseire és az emberi lény védelmét biztosító egyéb jogi rendelkezésekre tekintettel.

5. cikk

Alternatívák hiánya

Emberen csak akkor szabad kutatást végezni, ha nincs más, hasonló hatékonyságú alternatíva.

6. cikk

Kockázatok és előnyök

1. A kutatás nem járhat olyan kockázattal és terhekkel az emberi lény számára, amely nem áll arányban a lehetséges előnyökkel.

2. Ezen túlmenően, azt a kutatást, amely várhatóan nem eredményez a kutatásban résztvevő egészségére nézve közvetlen előnyt, csak abban az esetben lehet elvégezni, ha az nem jár az elfogadhatónál nagyobb kockázattal és az elfogadhatónál nagyobb teherrel a kutatásban résztvevő számára. Ez az előírás a kutatási részvételbe való beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyek védelméről rendelkező 15. cikk 2. bekezdése II. pontjának sérelme nélkül alkalmazandó.

7. cikk

Jóváhagyás

Kutatást csak abban az esetben lehet végezni, ha a kutatási tervet az arra hatáskörrel rendelkező szerv jóváhagyta, azt követően, hogy független vizsgálat alá vetette annak tudományos érdemeit, ideértve a kutatási cél fontosságának értékelését és az etikai elfogadhatóság multidiszciplináris megítélését is.

8. cikk

Tudományos minőség

Minden kutatásnak tudományosan megalapozottnak kell lennie, meg kell felelnie a tudományos minőség általánosan elfogadott követelményeinek, és azt a vonatkozó szakmai szabályokkal és előírásokkal összhangban kell lefolytatni, megfelelő képesítéssel rendelkező kutató felügyelete alatt.

III. Fejezet

ETIKAI BIZOTTSÁG

9. cikk

Az etikai bizottság független vizsgálata

1. Minden kutatási tervet az etikai elfogadhatóság független vizsgálata céljából be kell nyújtani az etikai bizottsághoz. A tervet mindazon államban be kell nyújtani független vizsgálatra, ahol bármilyen kutatási tevékenység végzését tervezik.

2. A kutatási terv etikai elfogadhatósága multidiszciplináris vizsgálatának a célja az, hogy óvja a kutatásban résztvevők méltóságát, jogait, biztonságát és jólétét. Az etikai elfogadhatóság értékeléséhez megfelelő szakértelmet és tapasztalatot kell igénybe venni, amely kellően tükrözi a szakmai és laikus álláspontokat.

3. Az etikai bizottság indoklással ellátott szakvéleményt fogalmaz meg.

10. cikk

Az etikai bizottság függetlensége

1. Jelen Jegyzőkönyv Részes Felei meghozzák a szükséges intézkedéseket abból a célból, hogy biztosítsák az etikai bizottság függetlenségét. Ennek a testületnek minden indokolatlan külső befolyásolástól mentesen kell működnie.

2. Az etikai bizottság tagjai kötelesek bejelenteni minden olyan körülményt, amely összeférhetetlenséghez vezethet. Amennyiben összeférhetetlenség merül fel, az abban érintett bizottsági tag nem vehet részt az etikai vizsgálatban.

11. cikk

Az etikai bizottság tájékoztatása

1. A kutatási terv etikai értékeléséhez szükséges valamennyi információt írásban kell az etikai bizottság rendelkezésére bocsátani.

2. Különösen a jelen Jegyzőkönyv mellékletében felsoroltakra vonatkozó információkat kell közölni, amennyiben azok a kutatási terv szempontjából lényegesek. A mellékletet az Egyezmény 32. cikke szerint létrehozott Bizottság a leadott szavazatok kétharmados többségével módosíthatja.

12. cikk

Indokolatlan befolyásolás

Az etikai bizottságnak meg kell győződnie arról, hogy a kutatásban részt vevő személyek nincsenek indokolatlan befolyásolásnak kitéve, ideértve az anyagi természetű befolyásolást is. Ebben a tekintetben különös figyelmet kell fordítani a sérülékeny és érdekei védelmére képtelen vagy másoktól függő személyekre.

IV. Fejezet

TÁJÉKOZTATÁS ÉS BELEEGYEZÉS

13. cikk

A kutatásban résztvevők tájékoztatása

1. A kutatásba bevonni kívánt személyeket megfelelően és érthetően tájékoztatni kell. A tájékoztatást dokumentálni kell.

2. A tájékoztatás kiterjed a kutatás céljára, a kutatási terv egészére, valamint lehetséges kockázataira és előnyeire, és tartalmazza az etikai bizottság véleményét is. Mielőtt az érintett személyek beleegyezését kérnék a kutatásban való részvételhez, a kutatás természetének és céljának megfelelően tájékoztatni kell őket különösen az alábbiakról:

I. a szóban forgó eljárások jellegéről, terjedelméről és időtartamáról, különösen a kutatás által okozott bármilyen teher részleteiről,

II. a rendelkezésre álló megelőző, diagnosztikai és gyógyító eljárásokról,

III. kedvezőtlen események vagy a kutatásban részt vevő személyek részéről felmerülő aggályok esetén megteendő intézkedésekről,

IV. a magánélet tiszteletben tartása és a személyes adatok védelme céljából tervezett intézkedésekről,

V. a kutatás során keletkezett, a résztvevő számára releváns információkhoz, valamint a kutatás általános eredményéhez való hozzáférés biztosítására tervezett intézkedésekről,

VI. a kár esetén nyújtandó megfelelő kártérítés esetére tervezett intézkedésekről,

VII. a kutatási eredmények, adatok vagy biológiai anyagok tervezett lehetséges további alkalmazásáról, ideértve a kereskedelmi célú felhasználást is,

VIII. a kutatási terv finanszírozási forrásairól.

3. Ezen túlmenően a kutatásba bevonni kívánt személyt tájékoztatni kell a jogairól és a védelmét szolgáló jogszabályi rendelkezésekről, különös tekintettel arra a jogára, hogy megtagadhatja vagy bármikor visszavonhatja a beleegyezését anélkül, hogy bármilyen hátrányos megkülönböztetés érné, különösen az orvosi ellátáshoz való joga tekintetében.

14. cikk

Beleegyezés

1. Semmilyen kutatás sem végezhető emberen az érintett személy tájékoztatást követő, szabad, kifejezett, konkrét és dokumentált beleegyezése nélkül, tekintettel az V. fejezet és a 19. cikk rendelkezéseire is. A beleegyezést a személy a kutatás bármely szakaszában szabadon visszavonhatja.

2. A kutatásban való részvételhez adott beleegyezés megtagadása vagy annak visszavonása nem eredményezhet semmilyen formájú hátrányos megkülönböztetést az érintett személy számára, különösen az orvosi ellátáshoz való joga tekintetében.

3. Amennyiben az érintett személy beleegyezési képessége tekintetében kétség merül fel, megfelelő eljárásoknak kell rendelkezésre állniuk a személy beleegyezési képességének vizsgálatára.

V. Fejezet

A KUTATÁSI RÉSZVÉTELBE VALÓ BELEEGYEZÉSI KÉPESSÉGGEL NEM RENDELKEZŐ SZEMÉLYEK VÉDELME

15. cikk

A kutatási részvételbe való beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyek védelme

1. A kutatási részvételbe való beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyen kutatást folytatni csak a következő feltételek együttes fennállása esetén szabad:

I. a kutatás eredményei valós és közvetlen előnyöket hozhatnak a személy egészségére nézve,

II. hasonló hatékonyságú kutatást nem lehet végezni a beleegyezési képességgel rendelkező személyeken,

III. a kutatásban részt vevő személyt tájékoztatták a jogairól és a védelmét szolgáló jogszabályi rendelkezésekről, feltéve, hogy a személy nincs a tájékoztatás befogadására képtelen állapotban,

IV. a jogszabályban előírt jogi képviselő vagy hatóság, személy vagy testület a szükséges beleegyezést a 16. cikkben előírt tájékoztatás megtörténtét követően, konkrétan és írásban megadta, figyelemmel a személy korábban kifejezett akaratára vagy ellenvetésére. A beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező felnőttet a lehetséges mértékig be kell vonni az engedélyezési eljárásba. A kiskorú személy véleményét korának és érettségi fokának megfelelően egyre meghatározóbb mértékű tényezőként kell figyelembe venni,

V. az érintett személy nem tiltakozik.

2. Kivételes esetben és a jogszabályban biztosított garanciák mellett engedélyezni lehet azt a kutatást, amely esetleg nem hoz az érintett személy egészségére nézve közvetlen előnyt jelentő eredményeket, az 1. bekezdés II., III., IV. és V. pontjának rendelkezéseire és az alábbi további feltételekre figyelemmel:

I. a kutatásnak az a célja, hogy az egyén állapotára, betegségére vagy rendellenességére vonatkozó tudományos ismeretek jelentős bővülése révén hozzájáruljon olyan eredmények eléréséhez, amelyekből előny származhat az érintett személy vagy azonos korcsoportba tartozó, vagy azonos betegségben vagy rendellenességben szenvedő, vagy azonos állapotú más személyek számára;

II. a kutatás minimális kockázattal és minimális teherrel jár az érintett személy számára, és a kutatás esetleges további előnyeinek lehetősége nem használható fel a kockázat vagy teher fokozott mértékének az igazolására.

3. A kutatásban való részvétel elleni tiltakozás, a beleegyezés megtagadása vagy a kutatásban való részvételhez adott beleegyezés visszavonása nem vonhat maga után semmilyen formájú hátrányos megkülönböztetést az érintett személyre nézve, különösen az orvosi ellátáshoz való jog tekintetében.

16. cikk

Tájékoztatás a beleegyezés megadása előtt

1. Azt, aki beleegyezését adja egy másik személy kutatásban való részvételéhez, megfelelően és érthetően tájékoztatni kell. A tájékoztatást dokumentálni kell.

2. A tájékoztatásnak ki kell terjednie a kutatás céljára, a kutatási tervre, valamint a kutatás lehetséges kockázataira és előnyeire, és tartalmaznia kell az etikai bizottság véleményét is. Ezen túlmenően tájékoztatást kell adni a kutatási részvételbe való beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyek jogairól és a védelmüket szolgáló jogszabályi rendelkezésekről, különös tekintettel arra a jogra, hogy a hozzájárulás megtagadható vagy bármikor visszavonható anélkül, hogy az érintett személyt bármilyen hátrányos megkülönböztetés érné, különösen az orvosi ellátáshoz való joga tekintetében. A tájékoztatásnak konkrétan a kutatás jellegének és céljának megfelelően, a 13. cikkben felsorolt információkat kell tartalmaznia.

3. A tájékoztatást az érintett személy számára is meg kell adni, feltéve, hogy nincs a tájékoztatás befogadására képtelen állapotban.

17. cikk

Minimális kockázattal és minimális teherrel járó kutatás

1. A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv alkalmazásában a kutatás akkor minősül minimális kockázatúnak, amennyiben, figyelembe véve a beavatkozás jellegét és mértékét, várhatóan legfeljebb nagyon csekély és átmeneti negatív hatásokat eredményez az érintett személy egészségére nézve.

2. A kutatás akkor minősül minimális teherrel járó kutatásnak, amennyiben várhatóan legfeljebb időleges és nagyon csekély kellemetlenséget okoz az érintett személynek. Az egyénre kifejtett teher értékelését, amennyiben szükséges, az érintett személy különleges bizalmát élvező személynek kell elvégeznie.

VI. Fejezet

KÜLÖNLEGES HELYZETEK

18. cikk

Kutatás terhesség vagy szoptatás alatt

1. Állapotos nőn olyan kutatást, amely potenciálisan nem hoz a nő, az embrió, a magzat vagy a megszületett gyermek egészsége szempontjából közvetlen előnyöket jelentő eredményeket, csak az alább felsorolt kiegészítő feltételek teljesülése esetében lehet elvégezni:

1. a kutatás célja az, hogy más nők számára a reprodukcióval kapcsolatos, vagy más embriók, magzatok vagy gyermekek számára előnnyel járó eredmények eléréséhez járuljon hozzá;

II. hasonló hatékonyságú kutatás nem végezhető el nem állapotos nőkön;

III. a kutatás csak minimális kockázattal és minimális teherrel jár.

2. Amennyiben a kutatás alanya szoptató nő, különleges gondossággal kell eljárni a gyermek egészségére kifejtett káros hatások elkerülése érdekében.

19. cikk

Kutatás sürgős klinikai állapotban lévő betegen

1. Jogszabálynak kell meghatároznia, hogy lehet-e kutatást végezni, és ha igen, milyen további garanciák mellett olyan sürgősségi helyzetekben, amikor

I. a személy nincs beleegyezésre képes állapotban, és

II. a helyzet sürgőssége miatt nem lehet megfelelő időben megszerezni a beleegyezést a személy képviselőjétől, vagy hatóságtól vagy olyan személytől vagy testülettől, akinek vagy amelynek a beleegyezését kérnék, amennyiben nem állna fenn a sürgősségi helyzet.

2. A jogszabálynak az alábbi meghatározott feltételeket kell tartalmaznia:

I. hasonló hatékonyságú kutatást nem lehet végezni nem sürgősségi helyzetben lévő személyeken;

II. a kutatás csak akkor végezhető el, ha a hatáskörrel rendelkező testület azt kifejezetten sürgősségi helyzetekre engedélyezte;

III. a személy által korábban kifejezésre juttatott és a kutatást végző számára ismert tiltakozást tiszteletben kell tartani;

IV. amennyiben a kutatás várhatóan nem hoz az érintett személy egészségére nézve közvetlen előnyökkel járó eredményeket, akkor a célja az, hogy az egyén állapotára, betegségére vagy rendellenességére vonatkozó tudományos ismeretek jelentős bővülése révén hozzájáruljon olyan eredmények eléréséhez, amelyekből előny származhat az érintett személy vagy azonos korcsoportba tartozó, vagy azonos betegségben vagy rendellenességben szenvedő, vagy azonos állapotú más személyek számára, és csak minimális kockázattal és minimális teherrel jár.

3. A sürgősségi kutatásban részt vevő személyeket vagy képviselőiket minél hamarabb el kell látni a kutatásban való részvételükkel kapcsolatos valamennyi információval. A részvétel folytatásához szükséges beleegyezést vagy hozzájárulást a lehető leghamarabb be kell szerezni.

20. cikk

Kutatás a szabadságuktól megfosztott személyeken

Amikor a jogszabály lehetővé teszi kutatás folytatását szabadságuktól megfosztott személyeken, az ilyen személyek csak az alább felsorolt további feltételek teljesülése esetén vehetnek részt olyan kutatásban, amely várhatóan nem eredményez az egészségükre nézve közvetlen előnyt:

I. hasonló hatékonyságú kutatást a szabadságuktól megfosztott személyek részvétele nélkül nem lehet folytatni;

II. a kutatás célja hozzájárulni olyan eredmények eléréséhez, amelyek előnnyel járhatnak a szabadságuktól megfosztott személyek számára;

III. a kutatás csak minimális kockázattal és minimális teherrel jár.

VII. Fejezet

BIZTONSÁG ÉS FELÜGYELET

21. cikk

A kockázat és a teher minimálisra csökkentése

1. Minden ésszerű intézkedést meg kell tenni a kutatásban résztvevők biztonsága, valamint az őket érintő kockázat és a teher minimálisra csökkentése érdekében.

2. Kutatást csak olyan klinikai szakember felügyelete mellett szabad folytatni, aki rendelkezik a szükséges képesítéssel és tapasztalattal.

22. cikk

Az egészségi állapot kivizsgálása

1. A kutatónak minden szükséges lépést meg kell tennie az érintettek egészségi állapotának kivizsgálására a kutatásba történő bevonásuk előtt annak érdekében, hogy kizárhatók legyenek azok, akiknél az adott kutatásban való részvétel fokozott kockázattal jár.

2. Amennyiben a kutatást életük reproduktív szakaszában lévő személyeken végzik, különös figyelmet kell fordítani a fennálló vagy jövőbeli terhességre, valamint az embrió, magzat vagy gyermek egészségére gyakorolt esetleges káros mellékhatásra.

23. cikk

A szükséges klinikai beavatkozások biztosítása

1. A kutatás nem járhat a szükséges megelőző, diagnosztikai vagy gyógyító eljárások késedelmével a résztvevő számára, és nem foszthatja meg őt azoktól.

2. A megelőzéssel, diagnosztikával vagy gyógyítással kapcsolatos kutatásban a kontrollcsoportba besorolt személyek számára biztosítani kell a bizonyított megelőzési, diagnosztikai vagy gyógyító eljárásokat.

3. Placebo használata akkor megengedett, ha nincsen bizonyítottan hatásos eljárás, vagy amennyiben ezen eljárások alkalmazásának megszakítása vagy abbahagyása nem jár elfogadhatatlan kockázattal vagy teherrel.

24. cikk

A fejlődés új eredményei

1. A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv Részes Felei intézkedéseket tesznek annak a biztosítására, hogy a kutatási tervet felülvizsgálják, amennyiben ezt a tudományos fejlődés vagy a kutatás folyamán felmerülő események indokolják.

2. A felülvizsgálat célja annak a megállapítása, hogy:

I. a kutatást abba kell-e hagyni, vagy a kutatás folytatásához szükséges-e módosítani a kutatási tervet;

II. a kutatásban résztvevőket vagy képviselőiket tájékoztatni kell-e a fejlődés új eredményeiről vagy az eseményekről;

III. a részvételhez szükség van-e további beleegyezésre vagy hozzájárulásra.

3. A kutatásban részt vevő személlyel vagy képviselőjével a részvételével kapcsolatos valamennyi új információt késedelem nélkül közölni kell.

4. A hatáskörrel rendelkező testületet tájékoztatni kell a kutatás idő előtti befejezésének indokairól.

VIII. Fejezet

ADATVÉDELEM ÉS A TÁJÉKOZTATÁSHOZ VALÓ JOG

25. cikk

Adatvédelem

1. Az orvosbiológiai kutatás során gyűjtött valamennyi személyes adatot bizalmasnak kell tekinteni és a magánélet tiszteletben tartására vonatkozó szabályok betartásával kell kezelni.

2. A jogszabálynak védelmet kell nyújtania a kutatási tervvel kapcsolatos minden egyéb olyan adat jogosulatlan átadása ellen, amelyet a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv rendelkezéseinek megfelelően az etikai bizottság számára benyújtottak.

26. cikk

A tájékoztatáshoz való jog

1. A kutatásban résztvevőknek az Egyezmény 10. cikkének rendelkezéseivel összhangban jogukban áll megismerni az egészségi állapotukkal kapcsolatban gyűjtött összes adatot.

2. A kutatási tervhez gyűjtött egyéb személyes adatokhoz a személyes adatok védelmére vonatkozó jogszabályok rendelkezéseivel összhangban férhetnek hozzá.

27. cikk

Gondossági kötelezettség

Amennyiben a kutatás során olyan adatok keletkeznek, amelyek fontosak a kutatásban résztvevők jelenlegi vagy jövőbeli egészsége vagy életminősége szempontjából, akkor ezt a tájékoztatást fel kell számukra ajánlani. Ennek egészségügyi ellátás vagy tanácsadás keretében kell megtörténnie. Ilyen információk közlése során kellő gondossággal kell eljárni az adatvédelem biztosítása, továbbá a résztvevőnek azon kívánsága tiszteletben tartása érdekében, hogy nem kíván ilyen tájékoztatást kapni.

28. cikk

Az eredmények hozzáférhetősége

1. A kutatás befejezésekor jelentést vagy összefoglalást kell benyújtani az etikai bizottság vagy a hatáskörrel rendelkező testület számára.

2. A kutatás eredményeit, kérelemre, a résztvevők számára is hozzáférhetővé kell tenni, ésszerű határidőn belül.

3. A kutató megteszi a szükséges intézkedéseket a kutatás eredményeinek ésszerű határidőn belüli nyilvánosságra hozatala érdekében.

IX. Fejezet

KUTATÁS OLYAN ÁLLAMOKBAN, AMELYEK A KIEGÉSZÍTŐ JEGYZŐKÖNYVBEN NEM RÉSZES FELEK

29. cikk

Kutatás olyan Államokban, amelyek a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvben nem Részes Felek

A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvben Részes Felek joghatósága alá tartozó szponzorok vagy kutatók, akik, illetve amelyek kutatás lefolytatását vagy irányítását tervezik olyan államban, amely nem tartozik a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvben Részes Felek közé, az adott államban alkalmazandó rendelkezések sérelme nélkül gondoskodnak arról, hogy a kutatási terv megfeleljen azoknak az alapelveknek, amelyeken a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv rendelkezései alapulnak. Amennyiben szükséges, az érintett Részes Fél meghozza az ehhez szükséges intézkedéseket.

X. Fejezet

A KIEGÉSZÍTŐ JEGYZŐKÖNYV RENDELKEZÉSEINEK MEGSÉRTÉSE

30. cikk

A jogok vagy elvek megsértése

A Részes Felek megfelelő jogi védelmet biztosítanak annak érdekében, hogy meggátolják, vagy mielőbb megszüntessék a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvben elismert jogok vagy elvek törvénytelen megsértését.

31. cikk

Kártérítés

Az a személy, aki kárt szenved el a kutatásban való részvételének következményeképp, megfelelő kártérítésre jogosult, a jogszabályban előírt feltételeknek és eljárásoknak megfelelően.

32. cikk

Szankciók

A Részes Felek megfelelő szankciókat helyeznek kilátásba jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv előírásainak megsértése esetére.

XI. Fejezet

A JELEN KIEGÉSZÍTŐ JEGYZŐKÖNYV ÉS EGYÉB RENDELKEZÉSEK KÖZÖTTI KAPCSOLAT, ÉS A KIEGÉSZÍTŐ JEGYZŐKÖNYV FELÜLVIZSGÁLATA

33. cikk

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv és az Egyezmény közötti kapcsolat

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv Részes Felei az 1-32. cikkeket az Egyezmény kiegészítő cikkeinek tekintik, következésképpen az Egyezmény valamennyi rendelkezése ennek megfelelően alkalmazandó.

34. cikk

Szélesebb körű védelem

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv egyetlen rendelkezése sem értelmezhető úgy, mint amely korlátozza vagy más módon érinti valamely Részes Félnek a lehetőségét arra, hogy szélesebb körű védelmet biztosítson a kutatásban résztvevők számára, mint amelyet a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv előír.

35. cikk

A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv felülvizsgálata

A tudományos fejlődés figyelemmel kísérése érdekében a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet az Egyezmény 32. cikkében említett Bizottságban a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv hatálybalépésének dátumától számítva legkésőbb öt év elteltével, majd azt követően a Bizottság által meghatározott időközönként meg kell vizsgálni.

XII. Fejezet

-----STARTING---POINT---VEGE---

ZÁRÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

36. cikk

Aláírás és megerősítés

A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv az Egyezmény aláírói részére áll nyitva aláírásra. A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv megerősítéstől, elfogadástól vagy jóváhagyástól függ. Az aláíró Fél a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet csak abban az esetben erősítheti meg, fogadhatja el vagy hagyhatja jóvá, amennyiben korábban vagy egyidejűleg megerősítette, elfogadta vagy jóváhagyta az Egyezményt. A megerősítési, elfogadási vagy jóváhagyási okmányokat az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál kell letétbe helyezni.

37. cikk

Hatálybalépés

1. Jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv az azon időpontot követő három hónap lejárta utáni hónap első napján lép hatályba, amikor öt Állam, közöttük az Európa Tanács legalább négy tagállama kifejezte, hogy a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet a 36. cikk rendelkezéseinek megfelelőn magára nézve kötelezőnek ismeri el.

2. Azoknak az Államoknak a tekintetében, amelyek később fejezik ki, hogy a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet magukra nézve kötelezőnek ismerik el, a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv a megerősítési, elfogadási vagy jóváhagyási okmány letétbe helyezésének időpontját követő három hónap lejártát követő hónap első napján lép hatályba.

38. cikk

Csatlakozás

1. A jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv hatálybalépését követően minden Állam csatlakozhat a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvhöz is, amennyiben csatlakozott az Egyezményhez.

2. A csatlakozás a csatlakozási okmánynak az Európa Tanács Főtitkáránál történő letétbe helyezése útján történhet, és a letétbe helyezés dátumától számított három hónap lejártát követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá.

39. cikk

Felmondás

1. Bármely Részes Fél bármikor felmondhatja a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet az Európa Tanács Főtitkárához intézett értesítés útján.

2. A felmondás az értesítésnek a Főtitkár általi kézhezvételétől számított három hónap lejártát követő hónap első napján válik hatályossá.

40. cikk

Értesítések

Az Európa Tanács Főtitkára értesíti az Európa Tanács tagállamait, az Európai Közösséget, valamennyi Aláírót, valamennyi Részes Felet és minden további, a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvhöz való csatlakozásra felkért Államot

a) minden aláírásról;

b) minden megerősítési, elfogadási, jóváhagyási vagy csatlakozási okmány letétbe helyezéséről;

c) a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv 37. és 38. cikkeiben meghatározott valamennyi hatálybalépési időpontról;

d) a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvvel összefüggő minden cselekményről, értesítésről vagy tájékoztatásról.

Ennek hiteléül az alulírottak, kellő felhatalmazás birtokában, aláírták ezt a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvet.

Készült Strasbourgban, 2005. január 25. napján, angol és francia nyelven, mindkét szöveg egyformán hiteles, egyetlen példányban, amelyet az Európa Tanács levéltárában kell letétbe helyezni. Az Európa Tanács Főtitkára az Európa Tanács minden tagállamának, a jelen Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv kidolgozásában részt vett nem tagállamoknak, az Egyezményhez csatlakozásra felkért minden Államnak és az Európai Közösségnek hitelesített másolatot küld.

Az orvosbiológiai kutatásra vonatkozó Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv melléklete

Az etikai bizottságnak adandó tájékoztatás

Az etikai bizottságot az alábbi, a kutatási terv szempontjából lényeges adatokról kell tájékoztatni:

A kutatási terv leírása

I. a kutatásvezető neve, a kutatók képesítése és tapasztalata, és értelemszerűen, a felelős klinikai személy, valamint a finanszírozási megoldások;

II. a kutatás célja és indoklása a tudomány legújabb állása szerint;

III. a tervezett módszerek és eljárások, ideértve a statisztikai és egyéb elemzési technikákat;

IV. a kutatási terv kimerítő összefoglalása laikusok számára érthető nyelven;

V. nyilatkozat arról, hogy a kutatási tervet korábban benyújtották, vagy egyidejűleg benyújtják értékelésre vagy jóváhagyásra, és a benyújtás eredménye;

Résztvevők, beleegyezés és tájékoztatás

VI. annak indoklása, hogy miért vonnak be emberi lényeket a kutatásba;

VII. a kutatási tervben való részvételhez történő beválasztás vagy kizárás kritériumai, és a személyek kiválasztásának és toborzásának körülményei;

VIII. kontrollcsoport használatának vagy mellőzésének indoklása;

IX. azoknak az előre látható kockázatoknak a jellege és mértéke, amelyek a kutatásban való részvétellel kapcsolatban előfordulhatnak;

X. a kutatásban résztvevőkön elvégzendő beavatkozások jellege, mértéke és időtartama, és a kutatás által okozott teher részletei;

XI. intézkedések olyan eshetőségek figyelemmel kísérésére, értékelésére és az azokra való reagálásra, amelyek a kutatásban résztvevők jelenlegi vagy jövőbeli egészségi állapotára nézve hatással lehetnek;

XII. azon személyek számára szóló tájékoztatás időzítése és részletei, akik a kutatásban részt vennének, továbbá e tájékoztatás nyújtására javasolt eszközök;

XIII. a részvételbe történő beleegyezéssel, vagy a beleegyezési képességgel nem rendelkező személyek esetében az arra jogosult által adott hozzájárulással kapcsolatos dokumentáció;

XIV. a kutatásban részt vevő személyek magánélete tiszteletben tartásának a biztosítására, továbbá a személyes adatok védelmére tett intézkedések;

XV. tervezett intézkedések azokkal az ismeretekkel kapcsolatban, amelyek létrejöhetnek, és fontosak lehetnek a kutatásban részt vevő személyek jelenlegi és jövőbeli egészségi állapotára nézve, valamint családtagjaik számára;

Egyéb információk

XVI. a kutatási tervvel összefüggésben teljesítendő kifizetések és ellenszolgáltatások részletei;

XVII. a kutatók független ítélőképességét befolyásoló, összeférhetetlenséget okozó körülmények részletei;

XVIII. a kutatási eredmények, adatok vagy biológiai anyagok esetleges további felhasználásának részletei, ideértve az üzleti célú felhasználást is;

XIX. a kutató számára felmerülő egyéb etikai problémák részletei;

XX. a kutatási tervvel összefüggésben keletkező károk fedezetére szolgáló biztosítás vagy kártalanítás részletei.

Az etikai bizottság a kutatási terv értékeléséhez szükséges további tájékoztatást is kérhet.”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) E törvény 2-3. §-a a Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv 37. cikkében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv, illetve e törvény 2-3. §-a hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külügyminiszter annak ismertté válását követően a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett egyedi határozatával állapítja meg.

(4) A Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyvben foglaltak végrehajtásáról az egészségügyi miniszter gondoskodik.