2017. évi VIII. törvény

a Magyarország Kormánya és a Vöröskereszt és Vörös Félhold Társaságok Nemzetközi Szövetsége (IFRC) között a Nemzetközi Szövetség Budapesti Regionális Hivatalának és Globális Szolgáltató Központjának jogállásáról szóló megállapodás kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és a Vöröskereszt és Vörös Félhold Társaságok Nemzetközi Szövetsége (IFRC) között a Nemzetközi Szövetség Budapesti Regionális Hivatalának és Globális Szolgáltató Központjának jogállásáról szóló megállapodás (a továbbiakban: Megállapodás) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Megállapodás hiteles angol és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„AGREEMENT between THE GOVERNMENT OF HUNGARY and THE INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES on THE STATUS OF THE REGIONAL OFFICE AND THE GLOBAL SERVICES CENTRE OF THE INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION IN BUDAPEST

The Government of Hungary (hereinafter called „the Government”) and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (hereinafter called „the International Federation”),

RECALLING the establishment by the International Federation of its Regional Delegation in Budapest, that is designated as Regional Office (hereinafter called „the Regional Office”), with the purpose of coordinating its humanitarian assistance in the States of Central and Eastern Europe as reflected in the Agreement signed on 10th March 1993 between the Government and the International Federation on the Status of the Regional Delegation in Budapest (hereinafter called „Agreement of 1993”),

RECALLING the Amending Protocol to the Agreement of 1993 signed on 21st April 2008 between the Government and the International Federation (hereinafter called the „Amending Protocol”),

WELCOMING the decision of the International Federation to establish a Global Services Centre for the provision of shared support services in Budapest (hereinafter called „the Global Services Centre”),

CONSIDERING the need to conclude a new agreement on the Regional Office and the Global Services Centre,

HEREBY AGREE as follows:

Article 1

1. In order to exercise its functions and to fulfil its purposes, the International Federation shall possess, on the territory of Hungary, juridical personality with the full capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property and to institute legal proceedings.

2. The Regional Delegation, located in Budapest and established pursuant to the Agreement of 1993, is designated as „Regional Office” and shall be treated as a regional representation of an international organization.

3. The International Federation shall also establish in Hungary a Global Services Centre, which shall constitute a separate representation of the International Federation in Hungary.

4. The Global Services Centre shall provide shared support services to the International Federation, and such other services as determined by the Secretary General of the International Federation.

5. The Regional Office or Global Services Centre of the International Federation in Budapest (hereinafter collectively called „the Offices”) may be re-designated by the International Federation with such official titles as notified to the Government by the Secretary General of the International Federation.

6. The term „Head of Office” as used in the Agreement shall be considered to refer to the head of the Regional Office and/or of the Global Services Centre.

7. The term „international staff” as used in the Agreement shall be considered to refer to the staff recruited by the Secretary General of the International Federation, whose employment is subject to the International Federation’s Staff Regulations and is not subject to national labour laws.

8. The term „national staff” as used in the Agreement shall be considered to refer to the staff recruited locally by a Head of Office, whose employment is subject to national labour laws.

Article 2

1. Through its Offices, the International Federation shall be free to carry out, on the territory of Hungary, such activities as may be necessary for the exercise of its humanitarian mission, in conformity with its own Constitution and with the Fundamental Principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.

2. The Regional Office shall be entitled to extend its activities to the territories of other States of Europe and Central Asia with the consent of the Governments of those States. The Global Services Centre will have global activities and responsibilities. The International Federation may expand or otherwise change the geographical scope of activities of its Offices. The International Federation shall inform the Government of Hungary of any such decision.

3. The Government shall facilitate to the maximum extent possible the humanitarian activities of the International Federation and of its Offices. It shall, in particular, allow and facilitate all transnational operations, contacts and communications of the Offices.

Article 3

1. In Hungary, the International Federation and its Offices shall act in conformity with the laws and regulations of that country. The International Federation’s humanitarian activities organized in Hungary shall be carried out through or in agreement with the Hungarian Red Cross. It will also be the Regional Office’s task to co-operate with and support the Hungarian Red Cross.

2. The International Federation, its Offices and their international staff and national staff, shall be authorized to make use at all times of the emblems of the red cross, the red crescent and the red crystal.

Article 4

1. The Offices, their property and assets, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process except insofar as in any particular case the International Federation has expressly waived its immunity. The property and assets of the Offices, including its vehicles, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation and any other form of interference, whether by judicial, executive or administrative action or procedure.

2. The premises and archives of the Offices, and in general all documents belonging to it or held by it, shall be inviolable wherever located.

Article 5

Without being restricted by financial controls, regulations or moratoria of any kind:

1. The Offices may hold any funds or currency of any kind and operate accounts in any currency, and

2. The Offices shall be free to transfer their funds or currency from one country to another and to convert any currency held by them into any other currency.

Article 6

1. The Offices, its assets, premises, income and other property shall be:

- exempt from all direct taxes, except for dues which are, in fact, no more than charges for public utility services, and

- exempt from customs duties and prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of articles imported or exported by the Offices for their official use and in respect of their publications.

2. The Offices are entitled to the reimbursement of the value-added-tax and excise duty included in the price of goods and services purchased by them for official use, in accordance with the relevant Hungarian laws and regulations. The head and the international staff of the respective Offices are entitled to the reimbursement of the value-added-tax and excise duty included in the price of goods and services purchased by them for private purposes in the Hungarian market in accordance with the rules established for the reimbursement of the value added tax and excise duty to members of diplomatic missions.

Article 7

1. The Government, in accordance with relevant Hungarian laws and regulations, shall permit and protect free communication on the part of the Offices for all official purposes and shall grant them, to the maximum extent possible, preferential treatment in the matter of priorities, rates and taxes on mails, cables, telegrams, telefax, telephone and other communications.

2. No censorship shall be applied to the official correspondence and other official communications of the Offices.

3. The Offices shall have free access to the national and international written and audio-visual media.

4. The Offices shall have the right to dispatch and receive their correspondence by courier or in bags, which shall have the same immunities and privileges as diplomatic couriers and bags, provided these bags are bearing visible external marks of their character and may contain only documents or articles intended for official use.

Article 8

The provisions of this Agreement shall apply in full to the Regional Office and the Global Services Centre and the members of the Offices including to all of their operations, to other officials of the International Federation, as well as to persons other than International Federation officials who are members of International Federation missions or who are invited to the Regional Office or the Global Services Centre by the International Federation on official business.

Article 9

1. The members of the Offices are:

- the respective heads of the Regional Office and of the Global Services Centre appointed by the Secretary General of the International Federation,

- the international staff of the Regional Office and of the Global Services Centre, and

- the national staff of the Regional Office and of the Global Services Centre.

2. The International Federation shall communicate the names of the international staff of the Offices to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary as soon as they take up their post at the Regional Office or at the Global Services Centre.

3. Upon receipt of this communication, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary will issue appropriate identity cards to the staff concerned.

Article 10

1. The members of the Offices shall, in respect of themselves, their spouses and relatives dependent on them, enjoy the following privileges and immunities in accordance with the principles of international law regarding the treatment of officials of international organisations:

a) immunity from legal process in respect of all words spoken or written and all acts done by them in their official capacity;

b) exemption from taxation on the salaries and emoluments paid to them by the International Federation;

c) immunity, together with their spouses and relatives dependent on them, from immigration restrictions and alien registration;

d) preferential exchange facilities;

e) repatriation facilities, together with their spouse and relatives dependent on them, enabling them, if they so wish, to leave at the earliest possible moment in time of international or internal crisis;

f) exemption from national service obligations;

g) the right to import free of duty their furniture and effects at the time of first taking up their post in Hungary.

2. Sub-sections b) to g) of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not apply to nationals of Hungary, to persons that are permanently resident in that country and to national staff. However, with a view of avoiding interruption in the continuation of essential work of the Offices, such persons shall be granted temporary deferments in the call-up for national service obligations if their names have, by reason of their duties, been placed upon a list compiled by the respective Heads of Office and approved by the Government.

3. As these privileges and immunities are accorded not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves, but in order to safeguard the independent exercise of the humanitarian mission of the International Federation in strict compliance with the Fundamental Principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the International Federation shall be under a duty to waive the immunity of any of the members of the Offices in any case where, in its opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the International Federation.

4. The International Federation shall take all measures to secure that all the persons enjoying such privileges and immunities respect the laws and regulations of Hungary.

5. In case of a dispute between the International Federation and a member of the national staff relating to an employment claim, the International Federation shall ensure that there is an effective procedure available for the resolution of the dispute with the staff concerned.

6. The privileges and immunities listed in paragraph 1 of this Article, as well as paragraph 3 of this Article, shall also apply, including the exceptions of paragraph 2 of this Article for nationals of Hungary, persons permanently residing in Hungary and to national staff, to the representatives of the International Federation other than members of the Offices, while exercising their functions and during their mission in Hungary, and duly provided with the International Federation identity card.

7. Applications for visas (where required) from the holders of the International Federation identity card, when accompanied by a certificate that they are travelling on the business of the International Federation, shall be dealt with as speedily as possible. As much as possible, multiple entry visas shall be accorded.

8. The President and the Secretary General of the International Federation, while travelling on International Federation identity card on the business of the International Federation, shall be granted the same privileges and immunities as are accorded to diplomatic envoys.

Article 11

1. The Government shall facilitate the acquisition of suitable housing accommodation for the international staff of the Offices.

2. The Government shall facilitate the registration of the vehicles of the Offices and accord them preferential treatment.

Article 12

1. The Global Services Centre will be co-located with the Regional Office in new premises in Budapest sourced by the Government as stipulated in the Supplementary Agreement to be entered into between the Government and the International Federation.

2. The Government will provide support for the offices of the Global Services Centre and for the Regional Office, as set out in the Supplementary Agreement.

Article 13

1. Any matter not provided for in the present Agreement shall be decided in accordance with general principles of international law regarding the treatment of officials of international organizations.

2. Both Parties to the present Agreement shall endeavour to settle by negotiation any dispute between the Government, on the one hand, and the International Federation and its Offices, on the other hand, concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement. Both Parties may, at the initiative of one of them, agree to submit a dispute to arbitration. They may in such cases agree on the organization of the arbitration and on the effect of the arbitral decision.

Article 14

1. The provisions of this Agreement shall enter into force thirty days after notification by the Government to the Secretary General of the International Federation that the necessary internal procedure for its coming into effect has been duly completed. From the date on which this Agreement enters into force, the Agreement of 1993 and the Amending Protocol shall cease to be in force.

2. This Agreement may be terminated by either Party by written notice. Such notice shall be given at least six months in advance.

3. Amendments to this Agreement shall be made by joint written agreement and will enter into effect according to paragraph 1 of this Article.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have signed and sealed this Agreement in the English and Hungarian languages. In case of any discrepancy between the texts, the English text shall prevail.

DONE AT Budapest, in duplicate, on 8 December 2016. 

 

 

 

 

 FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF HUNGARY

 FOR THE INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF RED CROSS AND RED CRESCENT SOCIETIES

MEGÁLLAPODÁS MAGYARORSZÁG KORMÁNYA és a VÖRÖSKERESZT ÉS VÖRÖS FÉLHOLD TÁRSASÁGOK NEMZETKÖZI SZÖVETSÉGE között A NEMZETKÖZI SZÖVETSÉG BUDAPESTI REGIONÁLIS HIVATALA ÉS GLOBÁLIS SZOLGÁLTATÓ KÖZPONTJA JOGÁLLÁSÁRÓL

Magyarország Kormánya (a továbbiakban: a Kormány) és a Vöröskereszt és Vörös Félhold Társaságok Nemzetközi Szövetsége (a továbbiakban: a Nemzetközi Szövetség),

Emlékeztetve a Nemzetközi Szövetség Regionális Küldöttségének létrehozására Budapesten (a továbbiakban: Regionális Küldöttség) abból a célból, hogy a Nemzetközi Szövetség humanitárius segítségnyújtását Közép- és Kelet-Európa államaiban összehangolja, összhangban a Kormány és a Nemzetközi Szövetség között a budapesti Regionális Küldöttség jogállásáról szóló 1993. március 10-én aláírt Megállapodással (a továbbiakban: 1993-as Megállapodás);

Emlékeztetve a Kormány és a Nemzetközi Szövetség között 2008. április 21-én aláírt, az 1993-as Megállapodást Módosító Jegyzőkönyvre (a továbbiakban: Módosító Jegyzőkönyv)

Üdvözölve a Nemzetközi Szövetség döntését, hogy a támogató funkciók ellátása érdekében Globális Szolgáltató Központot kíván létesíteni Budapesten (a továbbiakban: Globális Szolgáltató Központ);

Tekintetbe véve azt, hogy a Regionális Hivatal és a Globális Szolgáltató Központ tárgyában új megállapodást szükséges kötni,

az alábbiakban állapodnak meg:

1. cikk

1. A Nemzetközi Szövetség, feladatainak ellátása és céljainak megvalósítása érdekében Magyarország területén teljes szerződéskötési és eljárási képességgel, valamint ingó és ingatlan tulajdon megszerzésére és afeletti rendelkezésre joggal bíró jogi személy.

2. A Budapest székhellyel működő és az 1993-as Megállapodás alapján létesített Regionális Küldöttség Regionális Hivatalként kerül kijelölésre, és nemzetközi szervezet regionális képviseletének tekintendő.

3. A Nemzetközi Szövetség létrehozza továbbá Magyarországon a Globális Szolgáltató Központot, amely a Nemzetközi Szövetség különálló magyarországi képviseleteként működik.

4. A Globális Szolgáltató Központ a támogató funkciók ellátását biztosítja a Nemzetközi Szövetség részére, és további egyéb funkciókat, melyeket részére a Nemzetközi Szövetség Főtitkára meghatároz.

5. A Nemzetközi Szövetség budapesti Regionális Hivatalát vagy a Globális Szolgáltató Központját (a továbbiakban együttesen: Hivatalok) a Nemzetközi Szövetség átnevezheti azzal a hivatalos megnevezéssel, ahogyan arról a Nemzetközi Szövetség Főtitkára a Kormányt tájékoztatta.

6. A „Hivatal vezetője” megnevezés, a Megállapodás értelmében a Regionális Hivatal és/vagy a Globális Szolgáltató Központ vezetőjét jelenti.

7. A „nemzetközi személyzet” megnevezés a Megállapodás értelmében a Nemzetközi Szövetség Főtitkára által alkalmazott személyzetet jelenti, akiknek az alkalmazására a Nemzetközi Szövetség Személyzeti Szabályzata irányadó, és akik alkalmazására nem vonatkoznak a nemzeti munkajogi jogszabályok.

8. A „nemzeti személyzet” megnevezés a Megállapodás értelmében a Hivatal vezetője által helyben szerződtetett személyzetet jelenti, akiknek az alkalmazására a nemzeti munkajogi jogszabályok irányadók.

2. cikk

1. A Nemzetközi Szövetség Hivatalai révén humanitárius küldetésének gyakorlásához szükséges feladatait szabadon láthatja el Magyarország területén, Alapokmányával, valamint a Vöröskereszt és Vörös Félhold Mozgalom alapelveivel összhangban.

2. A Regionális Hivatal jogosult arra, hogy tevékenységét kiterjessze Európa és Közép-Ázsia többi államának területére az érintett államok kormányainak hozzájárulásával. A Globális Szolgáltató Központ globális tevékenységi körrel és felelősséggel bír. A Nemzetközi Szövetség kiterjesztheti vagy más módon módosíthatja a Hivatalok földrajzi hatályát. A Nemzetközi Szövetség minden ilyen döntéséről értesíti a Kormányt.

3. A Kormány a lehető legnagyobb mértékben megkönnyíti a Nemzetközi Szövetség és Hivatalainak humanitárius tevékenységét. A Kormány különösen engedélyezi és elősegíti a Hivatalok nemzetközi jellegű működését, kapcsolatait és érintkezését.

3. cikk

1. A Nemzetközi Szövetség és Hivatalai Magyarország területén az ország törvényeinek és jogszabályainak megfelelően tevékenykednek. A Nemzetközi Szövetség Magyarország területén szervezett humanitárius tevékenységét a Magyar Vöröskereszt révén vagy azzal egyetértésben végzi. Ugyancsak a Regionális Hivatal feladata a Magyar Vöröskereszttel történő együttműködés és annak támogatása is.

2. A Nemzetközi Szövetség, Hivatalai, azok nemzetközi és nemzeti személyzete jogosult a vörös kereszt, vörös félhold, valamint a vörös kristály embléma használatára.

4. cikk

1. A Hivatalok, valamint azok bárhol, bárkinél lévő tulajdona és pénzeszközei mentesek a joghatóság minden formája alól, kivéve, ha arról valamely esetben a Nemzetközi Szövetség kifejezetten lemondott. A Hivatalok tulajdona és pénzeszközei, beleértve a közlekedési eszközöket is, mentesek a házkutatás, az igénybevétel, az elkobzás, a kisajátítás, valamint a bírósági, közigazgatási vagy végrehajtási eljárás, illetve beavatkozás bármely más formája alól.

2. A Hivatalok helyiségei, irattára és okmányai, bárhol is találhatók, sérthetetlenek.

5. cikk

A Hivatalok pénzügyi ellenőrzésen, szabályozáson vagy fizetési moratóriumon alapuló korlátozás nélkül

1. bármilyen betétet és külföldi fizetési eszközt tarthatnak, valamint rendelkezhetnek bármilyen fizetési eszközben lévő devizaszámla felett, és

2. szabadon átutalhatják betéteiket és külföldi fizetési eszközeiket az egyik országból a másik országba, valamint átválthatják bármilyen külföldi fizetési eszközüket bármely más külföldi fizetési eszközre.

6. cikk

1. A Hivatalok vagyontárgyai, helyiségei, jövedelme és egyéb tulajdona:

- mentesek mindenfajta közvetlen adó alól, kivéve azon díjakat, amelyek közüzemi szolgáltatások fejében járnak, és

- a hivatalos használatra behozott és kivitt áruk, valamint kiadványaik tekintetében vámmentességet élveznek, továbbá mentesek minden behozatali és kiviteli korlátozás és tilalom alól.

2. A Hivatalok jogosultak az általuk, hivatalos célra vásárolt termékek és szolgáltatások árában foglalt általános forgalmi adó és jövedéki adó visszatérítésére, a vonatkozó hatályos magyar jogszabályokkal összhangban. A Hivatalok vezetője és nemzetközi személyzete jogosultak az általuk, személyes célra a magyar piacon vásárolt bármely termék, illetve szolgáltatás árában foglalt általános forgalmi adó és jövedéki adó visszatérítésére a diplomáciai képviseletek tagjaira vonatkozó általános forgalmi adó és jövedéki adó visszatérítési szabályok szerint.

7. cikk

1. A Kormány a vonatkozó magyar jogszabályokkal összhangban engedélyezi és védi a Hivatalok szabad érintkezését minden hivatalos ügyben, valamint a lehető legnagyobb mértékben kedvező elbánást biztosít a levelezés, a kábeltáviratok, a táviratok, a távfénymásolatok, a telefon, illetve más közlések elsőbbsége, díja és illetéke tekintetében.

2. A Hivatalok hivatalos levelezése és más hivatalos közlései tekintetében cenzúra nem alkalmazható.

3. A Hivatalok jogosultak az országos és nemzetközi írásos és audiovizuális médiumok szabad igénybevételére.

4. A Hivatalok jogosultak levelezésüket olyan futárok vagy csomagok útján továbbítani, illetve fogadni, amelyek a diplomáciai futárokkal és diplomáciai poggyásszal azonos kiváltságokat és mentességeket élveznek, feltéve, hogy ezeket a csomagokat a rájuk utaló látható külső jellel látták el és csak hivatalos célra szolgáló iratokat és tárgyakat tartalmaznak.

8. cikk

Jelen Megállapodás rendelkezéseit teljes körűen alkalmazni kell a Regionális Hivatalra és a Globális Szolgáltató Központra, a Hivatalok tagjaira, beleértve azok teljes tevékenységét, továbbá a Nemzetközi Szövetség más hivatalnokaira, valamint a Nemzetközi Szövetség hivatalnokain túl azon személyekre, akik a Nemzetközi Szövetség misszióinak tagjai, vagy akiket a Nemzetközi Szövetség hivatalos célból hívott meg a Regionális Hivatalhoz vagy a Globális Szolgáltató Központhoz.

9. cikk

1. A Hivatalok tagjai:

- a Regionális Hivatal és a Globális Szolgáltató Központ vezetői, akiket a Nemzetközi Szövetség Főtitkára nevez ki,

- a Regionális Hivatal és a Globális Szolgáltató Központ nemzetközi személyzete és

- a Regionális Hivatal és a Globális Szolgáltató Központ nemzeti személyzete.

2. A Hivatalok nemzetközi személyzete tagjainak nevét a Nemzetközi Szövetség közli Magyarország Külgazdasági és Külügyminisztériumával, amint megkezdték tisztségük ellátását a Regionális Hivatalban vagy a Globális Szolgáltató Központban.

3. Ezen értesítés kézhezvétele alapján Magyarország Külgazdasági és Külügyminisztériuma az érintett személyzet részére kiállítja a megfelelő személyazonossági igazolványt.

10. cikk

1. A Hivatalok tagjait, házastársukat és eltartott hozzátartozóikat a nemzetközi jognak a nemzetközi szervezetek tisztviselőire vonatkozó alapelveivel összhangban a következő kiváltságok és mentességek illetik meg:

a) mentesek hivatalos minőségükben, szóban és írásban tett nyilatkozataik és összes egyéb hivatalos tevékenységük tekintetében a joghatóság alól;

b) mentesek a Nemzetközi Szövetség által fizetett illetmény és egyéb járandóság tekintetében az adózás alól;

c) mentesek, házastársukkal és eltartott hozzátartozóikkal együtt a bevándorlást korlátozó szabályok, valamint a külföldiek bejelentésére vonatkozó előírások alól;

d) a fizetési eszközök beváltása tekintetében könnyítéseket élveznek;

e) nemzetközi vagy belső válság idején őket, házastársukat és eltartott hozzátartozóikat hazatérési könnyítések illetik meg, amelyek révén kívánságukra a lehető legkorábban távozhatnak;

f) mentesek a nemzeti szolgálati kötelezettségek alól;

g) joguk van berendezési és személyes használati tárgyaikat vámmentesen behozni, hivataluknak Magyarországon első ízben történő átvétele alkalmával.

2. Jelen Cikk 1. bekezdésének b)-g) pontjai nem alkalmazhatók Magyarország állampolgáraira, az állandó tartózkodásra jogosító engedéllyel rendelkező lakosaira, valamint a nemzeti személyzetre. Annak érdekében, hogy a Hivatalok érdemi munkájának folyamatosságát zökkenőmentesen elláthassák, azon személyek, akik nevét feladataik teljesítése okából a Hivatalok vezetői által összeállított és a Kormány által jóváhagyott listára felvették, a nemzeti szolgálati kötelezettségekre történő behívásra vonatkozóan ideiglenes halasztást kapnak.

3. Mivel ezek a kiváltságok és mentességek nem az egyének előnyben részesítését, hanem a Nemzetközi Szövetség humanitárius küldetése független gyakorlásának biztosítását szolgálják a Nemzetközi Vöröskereszt és a Vörös Félhold Mozgalom alapelveivel való szoros összhangban, a Nemzetközi Szövetség köteles a Hivatalok bármely tagjának mentességéről lemondani bármely esetben, amikor véleménye szerint a mentesség az igazságszolgáltatás menetét akadályozná és arról a Nemzetközi Szövetség érdekeinek sérelme nélkül lehet lemondani.

4. A Nemzetközi Szövetség megtesz minden intézkedést annak érdekében, hogy az ilyen kiváltságokat és mentességeket élvező minden személy tiszteletben tartsa Magyarország törvényeit és jogszabályait.

5. Amennyiben a Nemzetközi Szövetség és a nemzeti személyzet tagja között munkaügyi kérdés kapcsán vita keletkezik, a Nemzetközi Szövetségnek hatékony vitarendezési eljárást kell biztosítania az érintett személy részére.

6. Jelen Cikk 1. bekezdésében felsorolt kiváltságok és mentességek, valamint jelen Cikk 3. bekezdése, ideértve továbbá a Magyarország állampolgáraira, a Magyarországon élő állandó lakosokra, és a nemzeti személyzetre vonatkozó, jelen Cikk 2. bekezdésben említett kivételeket is, alkalmazandók a Nemzetközi Szövetség azon képviselőire is, akik nem a Hivatalok tagjai, de Magyarországon kiküldetésük során feladatokat látnak el, amennyiben rendelkeznek a Nemzetközi Szövetség által kellő módon kiállított személyazonossági igazolvánnyal.

7. A Nemzetközi Szövetség személyazonossági igazolványával ellátott személyeknek a Nemzetközi Szövetség megbízásából történő hivatalos célú utazást igazoló okirattal kísért vízumkérelmét (amennyiben szükséges) a lehető leggyorsabban kell elintézni. Amennyire lehetséges, többszöri belépésre jogosító vízumot kell kiadni.

8. A Nemzetközi Szövetség Elnökét és Főtitkárát, amikor a Nemzetközi Szövetség személyazonossági igazolványával a Nemzetközi Szövetség nevében hivatalos célból utaznak, a diplomáciai képviselőt megillető kiváltságok és mentességek illetik meg.

11. cikk

1. A Kormány megkönnyíti a Hivatalok nemzetközi személyzete megfelelő lakáshoz jutását.

2. A Kormány megkönnyíti a Hivatalok járműveinek regisztrációját és kedvező elbírálásban részesíti őket.

12. cikk

1. A Globális Szolgáltató Központot a Regionális Hivatallal közös új helyiségekben helyezik el Budapesten, melynek költségeit a Kormány viseli, a Kormány és a Nemzetközi Szövetség között létrehozandó Kiegészítő Megállapodás előírásai szerint.

2. A Kormány támogatást nyújt a Globális Szolgáltató Központ és a Regionális Hivatal irodái részére a Kiegészítő Megállapodással összhangban.

13. cikk

1. Bármely olyan ügyet, amelyről a jelen Megállapodás nem rendelkezik, a nemzetközi jognak a nemzetközi szervezetek tisztségviselőire vonatkozó általános alapelveivel összhangban kell rendezni.

2. Jelen Megállapodás Szerződő Felei az egyrészről a Kormány, másrészről a Nemzetközi Szövetség vagy annak Hivatalai között felmerülő bármely vitát, amely a jelen Megállapodás értelmezéséből ered, tárgyalások útján kívánják rendezni. A Szerződő Felek bármely Fél kezdeményezésére megállapodhatnak abban, hogy a vitát választottbíróság elé terjesztik. Ilyen esetekben megállapodhatnak a választottbíróság szervezetéről és a választottbírósági döntés hatályáról.

14. cikk

1. Jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései azt követő harmincadik napon lépnek hatályba, amikor a Kormány értesíti a Nemzetközi Szövetség Főtitkárát arról, hogy a Megállapodás hatálybalépéséhez szükséges belső eljárás befejeződött. Jelen Megállapodás hatálybelépésével egyidejűleg az 1993-as Megállapodás és a Módosító Jegyzőkönyv hatályát veszti.

2. Jelen Megállapodást bármelyik Szerződő Fél írásban felmondhatja. A felmondásra vonatkozó értesítést legalább hat hónappal előbb kell átadni.

3. Jelen Megállapodás módosításait közös írásos megállapodás formájában kell létrehozni és jelen Cikk 1. bekezdésében foglaltaknak megfelelően lépnek hatályba.

Ennek hiteléül kellőképpen meghatalmazott alulírottak kézjegyükkel és pecsétjükkel látták el a jelen Megállapodás angol és magyar nyelvű szövegét. A szövegek közti eltérés esetén az angol szöveg az irányadó.

Készült Budapesten, két példányban, 2016. december 8-án. 

 

 

 

 

 MAGYARORSZÁG KORMÁNYA RÉSZÉRŐL

 A VÖRÖSKERESZT ÉS VÖRÖS FÉLHOLD TÁRSASÁGOK NEMZETKÖZI SZÖVETSÉGE RÉSZÉRŐL”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. §, a 3. § és az 5. § a Megállapodás 14. cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Megállapodás, illetve a 2. §, a 3. § és az 5. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter annak ismertté válását követően a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter és az államháztartásért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.

5. § Hatályát veszti a Magyar Köztársaság Kormánya és a Vöröskereszt és Vörös Félhold Társaságok Nemzetközi Szövetsége között a Nemzetközi Szövetség budapesti Regionális Küldöttségének jogállásáról szóló, Budapesten, 1993. március 10-én aláírt Megállapodás kihirdetéséről szóló 106/1993. (VII. 20.) Korm. rendelet, valamint a Magyar Köztársaság Kormánya és a Vöröskereszt és Vörös Félhold Társaságok Nemzetközi Szövetsége között a Nemzetközi Szövetség budapesti Regionális Küldöttségének jogállásáról szóló Megállapodáshoz fűzött 1. számú Kiegészítő Jegyzőkönyv kihirdetéséről szóló 98/2008. (IV. 29.) Korm. rendelet.