2016. évi CLIV. törvény

a Magyarország Kormánya és Katar Állam Kormánya közötti légiközlekedési megállapodás kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és Katar Állam Kormánya közötti légiközlekedési megállapodás (a továbbiakban: Megállapodás) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Megállapodás hiteles angol és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF HUNGARY AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF QATAR FOR AIR SERVICES

The Government of Hungary and the Government of the State of Qatar hereinafter referred to as the „Contracting Parties”;

being parties to the Convention on International Civil Aviation opened for signature at Chicago on the seventh day of December, 1944;

desiring to conclude an Agreement, supplementary to the said Convention, for the purpose of establishing air services between and beyond their respective territories;

desiring to ensure the highest degree of safety and security in international air transport; Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement, unless the context otherwise requires:

a) the term „the Convention” means the Convention on International Civil Aviation opened for signature at Chicago on the seventh day of December 1944 and includes any Annex adopted under Article (90) of that Convention and any amendment of the Annexes or the Convention under Articles (90) and (94) thereof, so far as those Annexes and amendments have become effective for or been ratified by both Contracting Parties;

b) the term „Agreement” means this Agreement, the Annex attached thereto, and any modifications to the Agreement or to the Annex;

c) the term „aeronautical authorities” means in the case of Hungary, the Director General of Civil Aviation, and in the case of the State of Qatar, the Minister of Transport and Communications, or in both cases, any person or body authorised to perform any functions at present exercisable by the said authorities or similar functions;

d) term „designated airline” means an airline which has been designated and authorised in accordance with Article (4) of this Agreement;

e) the term „territory” in relation to a State has the meaning assigned to it in Article (2) of the Convention;

f) the terms „air service”, „international air service”, „airline” and „stop for non-traffic purposes”, have the meanings respectively assigned to them in Article (96) of the Convention;

g) the term „capacity”:

i) in relation to an aircraft means the payload of the aircraft available on the route or section of a route;

ii) in relation to a specified air service means the capacity of aircraft, used on such service, multiplied by the frequency of the flights, operated by such an aircraft over a given period and route or section of route;

h) the term „tariff” means the prices to be paid for the carriage of passengers, baggage and cargo and the conditions under which those prices apply, including prices and conditions for agency and other auxiliary services, but excluding remuneration and conditions for the carriage of mail;

i) the terms „user charges” means a charge made to airlines by the competent authority or permitted by that authority to be made for the provision of airport property of facilities or of air navigation facilities, or related services and facilities, for aircraft, their crews, passengers and cargo;

j) the term „Air Operator Certificate” means a document issued to an airline by the aeronautical authorities of a Contracting Party which affirms that the airline in question has the professional ability and organisation to secure the safe operation of aircraft for the aviation activities specified in the certificate.

k) References in this Agreement to „airlines of Hungary” shall be understood as referring to airlines designated by Hungary;

l) References in this Agreement to the „EU Treaties” shall be understood as referring to the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union.

m) References in this Agreement to „nationals of Hungary” shall be understood as referring to nationals of European Union Member States;

Article 2

Applicability of Chicago Convention

The provisions of this Agreement shall be subject to the provisions of the Convention in so far as those provisions are applicable to international air services.

Article 3

Grant of Rights

(1) Each Contracting Party grants to the other Contracting Party the following rights in respect of its scheduled international air services;

a) the right to fly across its territory without landing;

b) the right to make stops in its territory for non-traffic purposes.

(2) Each Contracting Party grants to the other Contracting Party the rights specified in this Agreement for the purpose of establishing scheduled international air services on the routes specified in the appropriate Section of the Route Schedules annexed to this Agreement. Such services and routes are hereafter called „the agreed services” and „the specified routes” respectively. While operating an agreed service on a specified route, the airlines designated by each Contracting Party shall enjoy in addition to the rights specified in paragraph (1) of this Article the rights to make stops in the territory of the other Contracting Party at the points specified for that route in the Route Schedule annexed to this Agreement for the purpose of taking on board and discharging passengers and cargo, including mail, in combination or separately.

(3) Nothing in paragraph (2) of this Article shall be deemed to confer on the designated airlines of one Contracting Party, the privilege of taking on board, in the territory of the other Contracting Party, passengers and cargo, including mail, carried for hire or reward and destined for another point in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Article 4

Designation and Authorisation

(1) Each Contracting Party shall have the right to designate in writing to the other Contracting Party one or more airlines for the purposes of operating the agreed services on the specified routes, and to cancel or alter such designation.

(2) On receipt of such a designation the other Contracting Party shall grant the appropriate authorisations and permissions with minimum procedural delay, provided:

a) In the case of an airline designated by Hungary:

i. it is established in the territory of Hungary under the EU Treaties and has a valid Operating Licence in accordance with European Union law; and

ii. effective regulatory control of the designated airline is exercised and maintained by the European Union Member State responsible for issuing its Air Operator Certificate, and the relevant aeronautical authority is clearly identified in the designation.

b) In the case of an airline designated by the State of Qatar:

i. its substantial ownership and effective control are vested in the State of Qatar and/or in its nationals; and

ii. the designated airline holds a current Air Operator Certificate issued by the aeronautical authority of the State of Qatar.

c) The designated airline proves upon request of the other Contracting Party that it is qualified for the operation of international air transport under the laws and regulations of the other Contracting Party.

(3) When an airline has been so designated and authorised, it may begin at any time to operate the agreed services, provided that the designated airline complies with the applicable provisions of this Agreement.

Article 5

Revocation and Suspension of Operating Authorisation

(1) Either Contracting Party may revoke, suspend or limit the operating authorisation or technical permissions of an airline designated by the other Contracting Party where:

a) In the case of an airline designated by Hungary:

i. it is not established in the territory of Hungary under the EU Treaties or does not have a valid Operating Licence in accordance with European Union law; or

ii. effective regulatory control of the designated airline is not exercised or not maintained by the European Union Member State responsible for issuing its Air Operator Certificate or the relevant aeronautical authority is not clearly identified in the designation.

b) In the case of an airline designated by the State of Qatar:

i. substantial ownership and effective control are not vested in the State of Qatar and/or in its nationals; or

ii. the designated airline does not hold a current Air Operator Certificate issued by the aeronautical authority of the State of Qatar.

In exercising its right under this paragraph the State of Qatar shall not discriminate between EU airlines on the grounds of nationality.

c) In the case of failure by that designated airline to comply with rules and regulations of the Contracting Party granting these rights; or

d) In case the designated airline otherwise fails to operate in accordance with the conditions prescribed under this Agreement.

(2) Unless immediate revocation, suspension or imposition of the conditions mentioned in paragraph (1) of this Article is essential to prevent further infringement of laws and regulations, such right shall be exercised only after consultation with the aeronautical authorities of the other Contracting Party.

Article 6

Exemption from Customs and other Duties

(1) Aircraft operated on international air services by the designated airlines of either Contracting Party, as well as their regular equipment, supplies of fuel and lubricant, and aircraft stores (including food, beverages and tobacco) on board such aircraft shall, on the basis of reciprocity and to the fullest extent possible under its relevant applicable law, be exempted from all customs duties, inspection fees and other taxes and charges on arriving in the territory of the other Contracting Party, provided such equipment and supplies remain on board the aircraft up to such time as they are re-exported or are used on the part of the journey performed over that territory.

(2) There shall also be exempt from the same duties, fees, taxes and charges:

a) aircraft stores taken on board in the territory of a Contracting Party within limits fixed by the authorities of the said Contracting Party, and for use on board outbound aircraft engaged in an international air service of the other Contracting Party;

b) spare parts and regular equipment introduced into the territory of either Contracting Party for the maintenance or repair of aircraft used on international air services by the designated airlines of the other Contracting Party;

c) fuel and lubricants supplied in the territory of a Contracting Party to outbound aircraft of a designated airline of the other Contracting Party engaged in an international air service, even when these supplies are to be used on the part of the journey performed over the territory of the Contracting Party in which they are taken on board;

d) advertising materials and airline documentation having no commercial value used by the designated airlines of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party;

e) the office equipment, except computers and ticket printers, introduced in the territory of either Contracting Party in order to be used in the offices of the designated airlines of the other Contracting Party provided that the necessity of such equipment in those offices is verified and the principle of reciprocity applies;

f) staff uniform items within reasonable limits, intended for use by the designated airline of one Contracting Party, provided that the items are imported temporarily into the territory of the other Contracting Party and re-exported within the maximum period of twenty four (24) months.

Materials referred to in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph may be required to be kept under customs supervision or control.

(3) The exemption from customs duties, inspection fees and other taxes and charges shall not extend to charges based on the cost of services provided to the designated airline or airlines of a Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

(4) The regular airborne equipment, as well as the materials and supplies retained on board the aircraft of either Contracting Party, may be unloaded in the territory of the other Contracting Party only with the approval of the customs authorities of that territory. In such a case, they may be required to be kept under the supervision of the said authorities up to such time as they are re-exported or otherwise disposed of in accordance with customs regulations.

(5) The exemptions provided for by this Article shall also be available in situations where the designated airline or airlines of one Contracting Party have entered into arrangements with another airline or airlines for the loan or transfer in the territory of the other Contracting Party of the items specified in paragraph (1) of this Article, provided such other airline or airlines similarly enjoy such exemption from such other Contracting Party.

(6) Passengers, baggage and cargo in direct transit across the territory of one Contracting Party and not leaving the area of the airport reserved for such purpose shall, except in relation to measures dealing with aviation security, be subject to a very simplified control. Baggage and cargo in direct transit shall be exempt from customs duties, inspection fees and other taxes and charges.

(7) Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Hungary from imposing, on a non-discriminatory basis, taxes, levies, duties, fees or charges on fuel supplied in its territory for use in an aircraft of a designated airline of the State of Qatar that operates between a point in the territory of Hungary and another point in the territory of Hungary or in the territory of another European Union Member State.

Article 7

Principles Governing Operations of Agreed Services

(1) There shall be fair and equal opportunity for the designated airlines of both Contracting Parties to operate the agreed services on the specified routes between their respective territories.

(2) In operating the agreed services, the designated airline of one Contracting Party shall take into account the interests of the designated airlines of the other Contracting Party so as not to affect unduly the services which the latter provides on the whole or part of the same routes.

(3) The agreed services provided by the designated airlines of the Contracting Parties shall bear close relationship to the requirements of the public for transportation on the specified routes and shall have as their primary objective the provision, at a reasonable load factor, of capacity adequate to carry the current and reasonably anticipated requirements for the carriage of passengers and cargo including mail originating from or destined for the territory of the Contracting Party which has designated the airline. Provision for the carriage of passengers and cargo including mail both taken on board and discharged at points on the specified routes in the territories of States other than that designating the airline shall be made in accordance with the general principles that capacity shall be related to:

a) traffic requirements to and from the territory of the Contracting Party which has designated the airline;

b) traffic requirements of the area through which the agreed service passes, after taking account of other transport services established by airlines of the States comprising the area; and

c) the requirements of through airline operation

(4) The designated airlines shall, not later than the thirty (30) days prior to the date of operation of any agreed service, submit for approval their proposed flight time-tables to the aeronautical authorities of both Contracting Parties. Said flight time-tables shall include the type of service, the aircraft to be used, and the frequencies. This shall likewise apply to later changes. In special cases this time limit may be reduced, subject to the consent of the said authorities.

Article 8

User Charges

Any charges that may be imposed or permitted to be imposed by a Contracting Party for the use of airports and air navigation facilities by the aircraft of the other Contracting Party shall not be higher than those that would be paid by its own airlines operating similar scheduled international air services.

Article 9

Tariffs

(1) Each Contracting Party shall allow tariffs for air services to be established by each designated airline based upon commercial considerations in the market place. Neither Contracting Party shall require its designated airline to consult other airlines about the tariffs they charge or propose to charge for services covered by this Agreement.

(2) Each Contracting Party may require notification or filing of any tariff to be charged by its own designated airline.

Neither Contracting Party shall require notification or filing of any tariffs to be charged by the designated airline of the other Contracting Party. Tariffs may remain in effect unless subsequently disapproved under paragraph (5) of this Article.

(3) Intervention by the Contracting Parties shall be limited to:

a) the protection of consumers from tariffs that are excessive due to the abuse of market power;

b) the prevention of tariffs whose application constitutes anti-competitive behaviour which has or is likely to have or is explicitly intended to have the effect of preventing, restricting or distorting competition or excluding a competitor from the route.

(4) Each Contracting Party may unilaterally disallow any tariff filed or charged by its own designated airline. However, such intervention shall be made only if it appears to the aeronautical authority of that Contracting Party that a tariff charged or proposed to be charged meets either of the criteria set out in paragraph (3) of this Article.

(5) Neither Contracting Party shall take unilateral action to prevent the coming into effect or continuation of a tariff charged or proposed to be charged by the designated airline of the other Contracting Party. If one Contracting Party believes that any such tariff is inconsistent with the considerations set out in paragraph (3) of this Article, it may request consultations and notify the other Contracting Party of the reasons for its dissatisfaction. These consultations shall be held not later than (14) fourteen days after receipt of the request. Without a mutual agreement the tariff shall take effect or continue in effect.

(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the tariffs to be charged by the designated airline(s) of Qatar for carriage wholly within the European Union shall be subject to European Union law.

Article 10

Data Provision

The aeronautical authorities of a Contracting Party shall supply or caused to be supplied to the aeronautical authorities of the other Contracting Party at their request such periodic or other statements of data as may be reasonably required for the purpose of reviewing the capacity provided on the agreed services by the designated airlines of the Contracting Party referred to first in this Article. Such statements shall include all information required to determine the amount of traffic carried by those designated airlines on the agreed services and the origins and destinations of such traffic.

Article 11

Transfer of Earnings

(1) Each designated airline shall be granted the right to engage in the sale of air transportation in the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party directly and, at its discretion, through its agents. Each designated airline shall have the right to sell transportation and any person shall be free to purchase such transportation in the currency of that territory or in freely convertible currencies. Provisions of this paragraph shall be subject to national laws and regulations.

(2) Each Contracting Party grants to the designated airlines of the other Contracting Party the right of free transfer of the excess of receipts over expenditures earned by the designated airline in the territory of its State. Such transfers shall be effected on the basis of the official exchange rates for current payments, or where there are no official exchange rates, at the prevailing foreign exchange market rates for current payments, applicable on the day of the introduction of the request for transfer by the airlines designated by the other Contracting Party and shall not be subject to any charges except normal service charges collected by banks for such transactions.

Article 12

Aviation Security

(1) Consistent with their rights and obligations under international law, the Contracting Parties reaffirm that their obligation to each other to protect the security of civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference forms an integral part of this Agreement. Without limiting their rights and obligations under international law, the Contracting Parties shall in particular act in conformity with the provisions of the Convention, the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September 1963, the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at the Hague on 16 December 1970, and the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at Montreal on 23 September 1971, the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, done at Montreal on 24 February 1988, and any other multilateral agreement and protocol governing aviation security binding upon both Contracting Parties.

(2) The Contracting Parties shall provide upon request all necessary assistance to each other to prevent acts of unlawful seizure of civil aircraft and other unlawful acts against the safety of such aircraft, their passengers and crew, airports and air navigation facilities, and any other threat to the security of civil aviation.

(3) The Contracting Parties shall, in their mutual relations, act in conformity with the aviation security provisions established by the International Civil Aviation Organization and designated as Annexes to the Convention to the extent that such security provisions are applicable to the Contracting Parties; they shall require that operators of aircraft of their registry or operators of aircraft who have their principal place of business or permanent residence in their respective territories or, in the case of Hungary operators of aircraft which are established in its territory under the EU Treaties and have valid Operating Licences in accordance with European Union law, and the operators of airports in their territory act in conformity with such aviation security provisions.

(4) Each Contracting Party agrees that its operators of aircraft shall be required to observe, for departure from or while within the territory of the other Contracting Party, aviation security provisions in conformity with the law in force in that country, including, in the case of Hungary, European Union law. Each Contracting Party shall ensure that adequate measures are effectively applied within its territory to protect the aircraft and to inspect passengers, crew, carry-on items, baggage, cargo and aircraft stores prior to and during boarding or loading. Each Contracting Party shall also give positive consideration to any request from the other Contracting Party for reasonable special security measures to meet a particular threat.

(5) When an incident or threat of an incident of unlawful seizure of civil aircraft or other unlawful acts against the safety of such aircraft, their passengers and crew, airports or air navigation facilities occurs, the Contracting Parties shall assist each other by facilitating communications and other appropriate measures intended to terminate rapidly and safely such an incident or threat thereof.

(6) Should one Contracting Party have problems with regard to the aviation security provisions of this Article, the aeronautical authorities of either Contracting Party may request immediate consultations with the aeronautical authorities of the other Contracting Party. Failure to reach a satisfactory agreement within thirty (30) days will constitute grounds for application of Article (5) of this Agreement.

Article 13

Recognition of Certificates and Licences

Certificates of airworthiness, certificates of competency and licences issued or validated in accordance with the laws and regulations of one Contracting Party, including, in the case of Hungary, European Union laws and regulations, and still in force shall be recognized as valid by the other Contracting Party for the purpose of operating the agreed services, provided always that the requirements under which such certificates or licences were issued or validated are equal to or above the minimum standards established under the Convention. Each Contracting Party reserves the right, however, to refuse to recognize, for the purpose of flights above its own territory, certificates of competency and licences granted to its own nationals or rendered valid for them by the other Contracting Party or by any other State.

Article 14

Aviation Safety

(1) Each Contracting Party may request consultations at any time concerning safety standards in any area relating to aircrew, aircraft or their operation adopted by the other Contracting Party. Such consultations shall take place within thirty (30) days of that request.

(2) If following such consultations, one Contracting Party finds that the other Contracting Party does not effectively maintain and administer safety standards in any such area that are at least equal to the minimum standards established at that time pursuant to the Convention, the first Contracting Party shall notify the other Contracting Party of those findings and the steps considered necessary to conform with those minimum standards, and that other Contracting Party shall take appropriate action within fifteen (15) days or such longer period as may be agreed, shall be grounds for the application of Article (5) of this Agreement.

(3) Notwithstanding the obligations mentioned in Article (33) of the Convention, it is agreed that any aircraft operated by the designated airline of one Contracting Party on services to or from the territory of the other Contracting Party, may while within the territory of the other Contracting Party, be made the subject of an examination by the authorised representatives of the other Contracting Party, on board and around the aircraft to check both the validity of the aircraft documents and those of its crew and the apparent condition of the aircraft and its equipment (in this Article called „ramp inspection”), provided this does not lead to unreasonable delay.

(4) If any, such ramp inspection or series of ramp inspections gives rise to:

a) serious concerns that an aircraft or the operation of an aircraft does not comply with the minimum standards established at that time pursuant to the Convention; or

b) serious concerns that there is a lack of effective maintenance and administration of safety standards established at that time pursuant to the Convention;

the Contracting Party carrying out the inspection shall, for the purposes of Article (33) of the Convention, be free to conclude that the requirements under which the certificate or licences in respect of that aircraft or in respect of the crew of that aircraft had been issued or rendered valid, or that the requirements under which that aircraft is operated, are not equal to or above the minimum standards established pursuant to the Convention.

(5) In the event that access for the purpose of undertaking a ramp inspection of an aircraft operated by the designated airline of one Contracting party in accordance with paragraph (3) of this Article is denied by the representative of that designated airline, the other Contracting Party shall be free to infer that serious concerns of the type referred to in paragraph (4) of this Article arise and draw the conclusions referred to in that paragraph.

(6) Each Contracting Party reserves the right to suspend or vary the operating authorisation of the designated airline of the other Contracting Party immediately in the event the first Contracting Party concludes, whether as a result of a ramp inspection, consultation or otherwise, that immediate action is essential to the safety of an airline operation.

(7) Any action by one Contracting Party in accordance with paragraphs (2) or (6) of this Article shall be discontinued once the basis for the taking of that action ceases to exist.

(8) Where Hungary has designated an airline whose regulatory control is exercised and maintained by another European Union Member State, the rights of the other Contracting Party under this Agreement shall apply equally in respect of the adoption, exercise or maintenance of safety standards by that other European Union Member State and in respect of the operating authorisation of that airline.

Article 15

Application of Laws and Regulations

(1) The laws and regulations of one Contracting Party relating to the admission to, remaining in, or departure from its territory of aircraft engaged in international air navigation, or to the operation and navigation of such aircraft shall be complied with by the aircraft of the designated airline of the other Contracting Party upon entrance into, departure form and while within the said territory.

(2) The laws and regulations of one Contracting Party respecting entry, clearance, transit, immigration, passports, customs, currency, sanitary requirements and quarantine shall be complied with by the designated airline of the other Contracting Party and by or on behalf of its aircraft engaged in international air navigation, crews, passengers, baggage, cargo and mail upon transit of, admission to, departure from and while within the territory of such Contracting Party.

(3) Neither of the Contracting Parties shall give preference to its own or any other airline over an airline engaged in similar international air services of the other Contracting Party in the application of its regulations specified in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this Article or in the use of airports, airways, air traffic services and associated facilities under its control.

Article 16

Airline Representation

(1) The designated airline of one Contracting Party shall be allowed, on the basis of reciprocity, to bring and maintain in the territory of the other Contracting Party its representatives and commercial, operational and technical staff as required in connection with the operation of the agreed services.

(2) These staff requirements may, at the option of the designated airline, be satisfied by its own personnel of any nationality or by using the services of any other organisation, company or airline operating in the territory of the other Contracting Party and authorised to perform such services in the territory of that Contracting Party.

(3) The representatives and staff shall be subject to the laws and regulations in force of the other Contracting Party.

Consistent with such law and regulations each Contracting Party shall, on the basis of reciprocity and with the minimum of delay, grant the necessary work permits, employment visas or other similar documents to the representatives and staff referred to in paragraph (1) of this Article.

(4) To the extent permitted under national law, both Contracting Parties shall dispense with the requirement of work permits or employment visas or other similar documents for personnel performing certain temporary services and duties.

Article 17

Code-Sharing Provisions

(1) When operating or holding out the agreed services on the specified routes, the designated airline of one Contracting Party, whether as the operating or marketing airline may, subject to the laws and regulations of the Contracting Party designating and authorising it, enter into co-operative marketing arrangement including but not limited to code-sharing with:

a) an airline or airlines of the same Contracting Party,

b) any designated airline of the other Contracting Party, or

c) an airline or airlines of a third Party. Should such a third Party not authorise or allow comparable arrangements between the airlines of the other Contracting Party and other airlines on services to, from and via such third country, the aeronautical authorities of the concerned Contracting Party have the right not to accept such arrangements.

(2) The entitlements set out in paragraph (1) of this Article may be exercised only where:

a) all airlines are holding the appropriate traffic rights, and the concerned aeronautical authorities being notified.

b) in respect of any tickets sold, the airline makes it clear to the purchaser at the point of sale which airlines will actually operate each sector of the service and with which airline or airlines the purchaser is entering into a contractual relationship.

(3) Each code-share service held out by a designated airline of a Contracting Party as a marketing airline will not be counted against the frequencies and capacity entitlements of the Contracting Party designating the airline.

Article 18

Consultations

(1) The aeronautical authorities of the Contracting Parties shall consult each other from time to time with a view to ensuring close co-operation in all matters affecting the implementation of, and satisfactory compliance with, the provisions of this Agreement and of its Annex.

(2) Such consultations, which may be between aeronautical authorities, shall begin within a period of sixty (60) days from the date the other Contracting Party receives a written request, unless otherwise agreed by the Contracting Parties.

Article 19

Settlement of Disputes

(1) If any dispute arises between the Contracting Parties relating to the interpretation or application of this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall in the first place endeavour to settle it by negotiation.

(2) If the Contracting Parties fail to reach a settlement by negotiation, they may agree to refer the dispute for decision to some person or body; if they do not so agree, the dispute shall, at the request of either Contracting Party be submitted for decision to a tribunal of three (3) arbitrators, one to be nominated by each Contracting Party and the third to be appointed by the two so nominated.

Each of the Contracting Parties shall nominate an arbitrator within a period of sixty (60) days from the date of receipt by either Contracting Party from the other of a notice through diplomatic channels requesting arbitration of the dispute by such a tribunal, and the third arbitrator shall be appointed within a further period of sixty (60) days.

If either of the Contracting Parties fails to nominate an arbitrator within the period specified, or if the third arbitrator is not appointed within the period specified, the President of the Council of the International Civil Aviation Organisation may, at the request of either Contracting Party, appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators as the case requires. If the President is of the same nationality as one of the Parties, the most senior Vice President who is not disqualified on that ground shall make the appointment. In such case, the third arbitrator shall be a national of a third State and shall act as President of the arbitral tribunal.

(3) The arbitral tribunal shall determine the limits of its jurisdiction in accordance with this Agreement and shall establish its own procedure.

(4) The Contracting Parties undertake to comply with any decision or award given under paragraphs (2) of this Article.

(5) If either Contracting Party fails to comply with such decision, the other Contracting Party shall have grounds for the application of Article (5) of this Agreement.

(6) Each Contracting Party shall bear the costs of the arbitrator appointed by it. The other costs and expenses of the tribunal shall be shared equally by the Contracting Parties.

Article 20

Amendments

(1) If either of the Contracting Parties considers it desirable to modify any provision of this Agreement, such modifications if agreed between the Contracting Parties and if necessary after consultation in accordance with Article (18) of this Agreement, shall come into effect when confirmed by and exchange of notes, through the diplomatic channels., between the Contracting Parties confirming that all internal legal procedures necessary for entry into force of the amendments have been completed.

(2) Amendments to the Annex to this Agreement may be agreed between the aeronautical authorities of the Contracting Parties. Such amendments may be applied provisionally from a date mutually determined by the aeronautical authorities and shall come into force in accordance with Article 24 of this Agreement.

Article 21

Registration with the International Civil Aviation Organization

This Agreement and any subsequent amendments thereto shall be registered with the International Civil Aviation Organization.

Article 22

Conformity with Multilateral Conventions

If a multilateral air transport treaty comes into force in respect of both Contracting Parties, the relevant provisions of this Agreement and its Annex shall be amended accordingly.

Article 23

Termination

Either Contracting Party may at any time give notice to the other Contracting Party of its decision to terminate this Agreement; such notice shall be simultaneously communicated to the International Civil Aviation Organization, in such case the Agreement shall terminate twelve (12) months after the date of receipt of the notice by the other Contracting Party, unless the notice to terminate is withdrawn by agreement before the expiry of this period. In the absence of acknowledgement of receipt by the other Contracting Party, notice shall be deemed to have been received fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the notice by the International Civil Aviation Organization.

Article 24

Entry into Force

This Agreement shall be approved according to the legal procedures in each Contracting Party. And each Contracting Party shall notify the other Contracting Party through the diplomatic channel of the completion of its constitutional formalities. The Agreement shall come into force on the thirtieth day after receipt of the later notification.

This Agreement shall supersede the Air Services Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Hungary and the Government of the State of Qatar signed on June 12th 2002.

In witness whereof, the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.

Done in duplicate at Doha this 10th day of October 2016 in the Arabic, Hungarian and English languages, all texts being equally authentic. In case of divergent interpretation, the English text shall prevail.

 For the Government of Hungary

 For the Government of the State of Qatar

Annex

Route schedule 1

Routes to be operated by the designated airline(s) of Hungary: 

 Points of departure

 Intermediate points

 Points in Qatar

 Points beyond

 Any Points in Hungary

 Any points

 Any Points in Qatar

 Any points

Route schedule 2

Routes to be operated by the designated airline(s) of State of Qatar: 

 Points of departure

 Intermediate points

 Points in Hungary

 Points beyond

 Any Points in Qatar

 Any points

 Any Points in Hungary

 Any points

Note:

Any point or points on the agreed routes may be omitted by the designated airlines of both Contracting Parties or may be operated in a different order on any or all flights, provided that the point of departure or arrival is in the country of their nationality.

LÉGIKÖZLEKEDÉSI MEGÁLLAPODÁS MAGYARORSZÁG KORMÁNYA ÉS KATAR ÁLLAM KORMÁNYA KÖZÖTT

Magyarország Kormánya és Katar Állam Kormánya a továbbiakban „Szerződő Felek”;

az 1944. december 7-én Chicagóban aláírásra megnyitott Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Egyezmény részeseiként;

attól az óhajtól vezérelve, hogy a fent említett Egyezménnyel összhangban megállapodást kössenek a területeik közötti és azon kívüli polgári légijáratok létrehozásáról;

attól az óhajtól vezérelve, hogy biztosítsák a légijáratok legmagasabb fokú biztonságát és védelmét a nemzetközi légiközlekedésben;

Az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

1. Cikk

Fogalom-meghatározások

Jelen Megállapodás alkalmazásában, kivéve, ha a szöveg másként rendelkezik:

a) az „Egyezmény” kifejezés a Chicagóban, 1944. december 7-én aláírásra megnyitott Nemzetközi Polgári Repülésről szóló Egyezményt jelenti, beleértve ezen Egyezmény 90. cikke értelmében elfogadott valamennyi Függeléket, valamint az Egyezmény 90. és 94. cikke alapján az Egyezmény vagy a Függelékek bármely módosítását, amennyiben ezen Függelékek és módosítások hatályba léptek, és mindkét Szerződő Fél ratifikálta;

b) a „Megállapodás” kifejezés a jelen Megállapodást, annak Függelékét, valamint a Megállapodáshoz és a Függelékhez kapcsolódó valamennyi módosítást jelenti;

c) a „légügyi hatóságok” kifejezés Magyarország esetében a légügyi főigazgatót jelenti, míg Katar Állam esetében a közlekedési és hírközlési minisztert, illetve mindkét esetben bármely olyan személyt vagy szervezetet jelent, aki/amely fél fel van hatalmazva a jelen Megállapodással érintett bármely feladat végrehajtására;

d) a „kijelölt légitársaság” kifejezés olyan légitársaságot jelent, amely a jelen Megállapodás 4. cikke szerint került kijelölésre és engedélyezésre;

e) a „terület” kifejezés egy állam vonatkozásában az Egyezmény 2. cikkében meghatározott jelentéssel bír;

f) a „légijárat”, „nemzetközi légijárat”, „légitársaság”, és „nem kereskedelmi célból történő leszállás” kifejezések az Egyezmény 96. cikkében meghatározott jelentéssel bírnak;

g) a „kapacitás” kifejezés az alábbi jelentésekkel bír:

i) valamely légijármű vonatkozásában a légijármű hasznos terhelése, amely rendelkezésre áll egy útvonalon vagy annak egy szakaszán,

ii) valamely meghatározott légijárat vonatkozásában a használatban lévő légijármű kapacitása megszorozva azzal a gyakorisággal, amellyel egy adott időszakban egy útvonalon, vagy annak egy szakaszán az adott légijárművet üzemeltetik;

h) a „viteldíj” kifejezés az utasok, a poggyász és az áruk szállításáért fizetendő díjakat, és azok alkalmazásának feltételeit jelenti, beleértve az ügynöki és egyéb kiegészítő szolgáltatások díjait és feltételeit, ide nem értve a posta szállításának díjazását vagy feltételeit;

i) a „használati díjak” kifejezés a légitársaságok részére az illetékes hatóság által megállapított vagy engedélyezett díjakat jelenti a repülőtéri tulajdon vagy létesítmények illetve léginavigációs létesítmények használatáért, beleértve a kapcsolódó szolgáltatásokat és létesítményeket a légijárművek, valamint annak személyzete, utasai és az áruk számára;

j) a „légi jármű üzembentartási engedély” kifejezés olyan dokumentumot jelent, amelyet a Szerződő Felek légügyi hatóságai állítanak ki valamely légitársaság számára az adott légitársaság szakmai felkészültségének és szervezettségének igazolására arra vonatkozóan, hogy a biztonságos üzemelést az engedélyben meghatározott légiközlekedési tevékenységek végzése során biztosítani képes.

k) A jelen Megállapodásban Magyarország légitársaságaira való utalást a Magyarország által kijelölt légitársaságokra való utalásként kell értelmezni;

l) A jelen Megállapodásban az „EU-szerződésekre” való hivatkozást az Európai Unióról szóló szerződésre és az Európai Unió működéséről szóló szerződésre való hivatkozásként kell értelmezni;

m) A jelen Megállapodásban a Magyarországon illetőséggel rendelkező jogalanyokra való utalást az Európai Unió tagállamaiban illetőséggel rendelkező jogalanyokra való utalásként kell értelmezni.

2. Cikk

A Chicagói Egyezmény alkalmazhatósága

A jelen Megállapodás rendelkezéseinek az Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel összhangban kell állnia, amennyiben azok a nemzetközi légi szolgáltatásokra alkalmazandók.

3. Cikk

Forgalmi jogok nyújtása

(1) Mindkét Szerződő Fél biztosítja a másik Szerződő Fél számára az alábbi jogok gyakorlását a menetrendszerű nemzetközi légi szolgáltatások vonatkozásában;

a) a terület leszállás nélküli átrepülésének joga;

b) a nem kereskedelmi célból történő leszállások végzésének joga.

(2) Mindkét Szerződő Fél megadja a jelen Megállapodásban meghatározott jogokat a másik Szerződő Fél számára, annak érdekében, hogy kijelölt menetrendszerű nemzetközi légi szolgáltatást hozhassanak létre azokon az útvonalakon, amelyet a jelen Megállapodáshoz csatolt Útvonalak vonatkozó részei szabályoznak. Ezekre a szolgáltatásokra és útvonalakra a továbbiakban „menetrend szerinti üzemelés”-ként és „megjelölt útvonalak”-ként történik hivatkozás. Egy megjelölt útvonalon menetrend szerinti üzemelés során, a Szerződő Felek által kijelölt légitársaságokat az (1) bekezdésben említettek mellett megilleti a leszállások végzésének joga a másik Szerződő Fél területén, poggyász, áru és posta elkülönülten vagy együttesen történő felvétele és lerakása céljából, a jelen Megállapodáshoz csatolt Útvonalak szerint meghatározott útvonalakon lévő pontokon.

(3) E cikk (2) bekezdésének egyetlen rendelkezése sem értelmezhető olyan módon, hogy az jogot keletkeztetne az egyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársaságának arra, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél területén utasokat, poggyászt és árut - ideértve a postát is - vegyen fel a másik Szerződő Fél területének másik pontjára való szállításának céljából.

4. Cikk

Kijelölés és engedélyezés

(1) Mindegyik Szerződő Félnek joga van arra, hogy írásban jelöljön ki a másik Szerződő Fél felé egy vagy több légitársaságot a megjelölt útvonalakon menetrend szerinti üzemelés céljából, valamint hogy törölje, vagy módosítsa az ilyen kijelöléseket.

(2) Az egyik Szerződő Fél által történő kijelölés kézhezvételét követően a másik Szerződő Fél a lehető legrövidebb eljárási időn belül megadja a megfelelő meghatalmazásokat és engedélyeket az alábbiak teljesülése esetén:

a) a Magyarország által kijelölt légitársaság esetében:

i. a légitársaság Magyarország területén került bejegyzésre az EU-Szerződések értelmében valamint az európai uniós joggal összhangban kiadott érvényes működési engedéllyel rendelkezik; és

ii. a légitársaság tényleges szabályozói felügyeletét a légi jármű üzemben tartási engedély kiadásáért felelős európai uniós tagállam gyakorolja és tartja fenn, és a kijelölés egyértelműen meghatározza az illetékes légügyi hatóságot.

b) Katar Állam által kijelölt légitársaság esetében:

i. a légitársaság többségi tulajdonjoga és tényleges felügyelete Katar Állam és/vagy annak illetőséggel rendelkező jogalanyainak kezében van; és

ii. a kijelölt légitársaság érvényes légijármű üzembentartási engedélyét Katar Állam légügyi hatósága bocsátotta ki.

c) A kijelölt légitársaság a másik Szerződő Fél kérésére igazolja, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai és rendelkezései szerint alkalmas a nemzetközi légiközlekedésben történő üzemelésre.

(3) Amennyiben valamely légitársaság a fentieknek megfelelően került kijelölésre és engedélyezésre, annak megállapodás szerinti légijáratok üzemeltetése bármikor megkezdődhet, ha, a légitársaság jelen Megállapodás vonatkozó rendelkezéseinek megfelel.

5. Cikk

Az üzemeltetési engedélyek visszavonása és felfüggesztése

(1) Bármely Szerződő Fél visszavonhatja, felfüggesztheti vagy, korlátozhatja a másik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága részére kiadott üzemeltetési engedélyt, amennyiben:

a) a Magyarország által kijelölt légitársaság esetében:

i. a légitársaság nem Magyarország területén került bejegyzésre az EU- Szerződések értelmében vagy az európai uniós joggal összhangban kiadott érvényes működési engedéllyel nem rendelkezik; vagy

ii. a légitársaság tényleges szabályozói felügyeletét nem a légi jármű üzemben tartási engedélyének kiadásáért felelős európai uniós tagállam gyakorolja vagy tartja fenn, vagy a kijelölés nem határozza meg egyértelműen az illetékes légügyi hatóságot.

b) Katar Állam által kijelölt légitársaság esetében:

i. a légitársaság többségi tulajdonjoga és tényleges felügyelete nem Katar Állam és/vagy annak illetőséggel rendelkező jogalanyai kezében van; vagy

ii. a légitársaság érvényes légijármű üzembentartási engedélyét nem Katar Állam légügyi hatósága bocsátotta ki.

A jelen bekezdés által biztosított jogainak gyakorlása során Katar Állam nem tehet különbséget az európai uniós légitársaságok között állampolgársági alapon.

c) Az említett kijelölt légitársaság nem képes eleget tenni az azon Szerződő Fél jogszabályainak és rendelkezéseinek megfelelő üzemelésnek, amely a jogokat biztosítja számára; vagy

d) A kijelölt légitársaság nem képes a jelen Megállapodás szerinti feltételeknek megfelelő üzemelésre.

(2) Hacsak azonnali visszavonás, felfüggesztés vagy a jelen cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott feltételek azonnali alkalmazása a vonatkozó jogszabályok és rendelkezések további megsértésének megelőzése érdekében nem szükséges, ezen jog csak a másik Szerződő Fél légügyi hatóságával történő konzultációt követően gyakorolható.

6. Cikk

Vámok és egyéb adók alóli mentesség

(1) A Szerződő Felek a nemzetközi légi szolgáltatások nyújtására kijelölt légitársaságai által a másik Szerződő Fél területére üzemeltetett légijárműveket, csak úgy, mint azok szokásos felszerelését, az üzemanyagot, a kenőanyagokat, a légijármű fedélzeten lévő készleteit (ideértve az élelmiszereket, italokat, dohányárut), a viszonosság elve alapján és a saját vonatkozó jogszabályok által megengedett legnagyobb mértékben mentesítik a vámok, jövedéki adók és egyéb illetékek és díjak megfizetése alól, amennyiben ezek a felszerelések és készletek a repülőgép fedélzetén maradnak, ameddig azokat újra ki nem viszik vagy az útvonal azon részén használatban vannak, amely ezen a területen át vezet.

(2) Az alább felsoroltakat szintén mentesíteni kell mindenféle vám, illeték, adó és díj alól:

a. a másik Szerződő Fél területén az adott Szerződő Fél hatóságai által megállapított korlátozáson belül a légijármű fedélzetén lévő készletek, valamint amelyek a nemzetközi légi szolgáltatás nyújtása során az adott ország területét elhagyó légijárművön használatban vannak;

b. a másik Szerződő Fél területére bevitt azon tartalék alkatrészek és a szokásos felszerelések, amelyek olyan a légijármű megjavításához szükségesek, amellyel a másik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága a nemzetközi légi szolgáltatásokat nyújtja;

c. az egyik Szerződő Fél területét elhagyó, nemzetközi légi szolgáltatást nyújtó kijelölt légitársaság légijárműve számára kínált üzemanyag és kenőanyag, akár akkor is, ha az útvonalnak csak egy része érinti az adott Szerződő Fél azon területét, ahol ezeket a fedélzetre viszik;

d. az egyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága által használt, kereskedelmi értékkel nem bíró promóciós anyagok és légifuvarozói dokumentáció a másik Szerződő Fél területén;

e. a hivatali felszerelés, kivéve azokat a számítógépeket és jegynyomtatókat, amelyeket azért importálnak a másik Szerződő Fél területére, hogy a kijelölt légitársaságok irodáiban használják, amennyiben bizonyítható az ilyen felszerelések használatának szükségessége, valamint érvényesül viszonosság elve;

f. személyzeti egyenruhák ésszerű keretek között az egyik Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaság általi használatra, abban az esetben, ha ezeket csak ideiglenesen hozzák be a másik Szerződő Fél területére és azokat maximum huszonnégy (24) hónapon belül exportálják is onnan.

Az eszközök, amelyekre a jelen bekezdés (a), (b) és (c) pontjai vonatkoznak, alávethetők vámvizsgálatnak vagy ellenőrzésnek.

(3) A vámok, vizsgálati díjak valamint egyéb adók és illetékek alóli mentességeket nem szabad kiterjeszteni olyan díjakra, amelyek az egyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága vagy légitársaságai által a másik Szerződő Fél területén végzett szolgáltatásokat érintik.

(4) A légijármű szokásos felszerelései, valamint azok az anyagok, készletek és felszerelések, amelyeket általában valamelyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága által üzemeltetett légijárművek fedélzetén tartanak, a másik Szerződő Fél területén kizárólag az adott területen illetékes vámhatóság jóváhagyásával rakhatók ki. Ebben az esetben az ilyen felszerelések és cikkek a jelen cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott mentességet élvezik, amennyiben azokat említett hatóságok felügyelete alá helyezik arra az időre, ameddig azokat újból exportálják vagy a vámrendelkezésekkel összhangban más módon el nem távolítják.

(5) A jelen cikk által biztosított mentességek olyan esetekben is elérhetők, amikor bármelyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága megállapodást kötött más légitársasággal vagy légitársaságokkal, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél területén kölcsönadja vagy átadja a jelen cikk (1) bekezdésében leírt szokásos felszereléseket és egyéb cikkeket, feltéve, hogy a másik légitársaság vagy légitársaságok részére ugyanazokat a mentességeket biztosítja a másik Szerződő Féltől.

(6) Bármely Szerződő Fél területén közvetlen átmenő forgalomban részt vevő, a repülőtér erre a célra kijelölt területét el nem hagyó utast, poggyászt és árut, csak egyszerűsített ellenőrzés alá kell vetni, kivéve a repülés biztonságát érintő intézkedéseket. A közvetlen átmenő forgalomban részt vevő poggyász és áru mentességet élvez minden vám, vizsgálati díj, adó és illeték megfizetése alól.

(7) A jelen megállapodásban foglaltak nem akadályozhatják Magyarországot abban, hogy hátrányos megkülönböztetés nélkül adókat, illetékeket, vámokat vagy díjakat vessen ki a területén felvett üzemanyagra, melyet Katar Állam által kijelölt légitársaság olyan légijárműve használ, amely Magyarország területének egy pontja és Magyarország vagy egy másik európai uniós tagállam területének egy másik pontja között közlekedik.

7. Cikk

A meghatározott járatok üzemeltetésére vonatkozó alapelvek

(1) Mindkét Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaság számára tisztességes és egyenlő feltételeket kell biztosítani a jelen Megállapodás alapján a területeik között megjelölt útvonalakon történő menetrend szerinti üzemelés során.

(2) A menetrend szerinti üzemelés során az egyik Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaságnak figyelembe kell venni a másik Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaság érdekeit olyan módon, hogy az azonos vagy részben azonos útvonalon történő üzemelés során a másik Fél által nyújtott szolgáltatásokat indokolatlanul ne befolyásolja.

(3) A Szerződő Felek kijelölt légitársaságai által a megjelölt útvonalakon nyújtott menetrend szerinti üzemelésnek meg kell felelni az utazóközönség elvárásainak, és elsődleges céljának kell lennie, hogy indokolható kihasználtsággal, megfelelő kapacitással biztosítsa az ésszerűen elvárható igényeket az utasok és áruk - beleértve a postai küldemények - szállítása során azon Szerződő Fél területéről vagy területére, amely a légitársaságot kijelölte. A légitársaságot kijelölő államoktól eltérő államok területén meghatározott pontokon felvett és leadott utasok és áru, beleértve a postát szállítására vonatkozó rendelkezéseket az általános alapelvekkel, a kapacitásra vonatkozóan az alábbiakkal összefüggésben kell meghatározni:

a. a légitársaságot kijelölő Szerződő Fél területére érkező és az onnan induló forgalomra vonatkozó igények;

b. azon területen érvényben lévő forgalmi igények, amelyeken keresztül a menetrendszerinti üzemelés történik az adott terület államának légitársaságai által nyújtott egyéb közlekedési szolgáltatások figyelembevételével;

c. az átmenő légitársasági üzemelés igényei.

(4) Minden kijelölt légitársaságnak legkésőbb harminc (30) nappal a menetrend szerinti üzemelést megelőzően be kell nyújtania a járat javasolt menetrendjét a másik Szerződő Fél légügyi hatóságához jóváhagyásra. Az említett menetrendeknek tartalmaznia kell a szolgáltatás jellegét és a használni kívánt légijármű típusát valamint a frekvenciákat. Ennek vonatkoznia kell a későbbi változásokra is. Különleges esetekben a fenti határidő rövidebb is lehet, az említett légügyi hatóságok hozzájárulásától függően.

8. Cikk

Használati díjak

Bármely díj, amely kivethető vagy kivetésre engedélyezett az egyik Szerződő Fél által a repülőterek vagy a léginavigációs berendezések használatáért a másik Szerződő Fél járata számára, nem lehet magasabb, mint az a díj, amit a saját légitársasága fizet a hasonló menetrendszerű nemzetközi légi szolgáltatások üzemeltetésekor.

9. Cikk

Viteldíjak

(1) Mindegyik Szerződő Félnek biztosítania kell minden kijelölt légitársaság számára, hogy a légi szolgáltatásokra vonatkozó viteldíjakat a piacon jelen lévő kereskedelmi megfontolásokra alapozva alakítsa ki. Egyik Szerződő Fél sem követelheti meg az általa kijelölt légitársaságtól, hogy tárgyaljon más légitársaságokkal a saját maga által szedett viteldíjakról, vagy hogy a jelen Megállapodás által meghatározott szolgáltatásokért szedendő díjakra javaslatot tegyen.

(2) Mindegyik Szerződő Fél előírhatja, hogy saját kijelölt légitársasága bejelentse vagy értesítse az általa kialakított viteldíjakkal kapcsolatban. Egyik Szerződő Fél sem írhat elő ilyen bejelentést vagy értesítést a másik Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaság által szedett viteldíjakkal kapcsolatban. A viteldíjak hatályban maradnak mindaddig, amíg a jelen cikk (5) bekezdése szerinti utólagos kifogás nem merül fel.

(3) A Szerződő Felek beavatkozása az alábbiakra korlátozódik:

a. fogyasztók védelme a befolyásos pozícióval való visszaélésből eredő túlzott mértékben magas viteldíjakkal szemben;

b. olyan viteldíjak kialakításának a megelőzése, amelyek alkalmazása olyan versenyellenes viselkedést alakítana ki, aminek valós szándéka ténylegesen vagy esetlegesen arra irányul, hogy egy versenytársat meggátoljon, korlátozzon, kizárjon az adott útvonalon történő üzemelésben.

(4) Mindegyik Szerződő Félnek jogában áll egyoldalúan kifogásolni saját kijelölt légitársasága által szedett bármely bejelentett díjat. Ugyanakkor ilyen beavatkozás csak akkor tehető meg, ha az adott Szerződő Fél légügyi hatósága úgy ítéli meg, hogy a kiszabott vagy kiszabni javasolt viteldíj megfelel a jelen cikk (3) bekezdésében meghatározott feltételeknek.

(5) Egyik Szerződő Fél sem léphet fel egyoldalúan annak érdekében, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága által kiszabott vagy kiszabni javasolt viteldíjak hatályba lépését vagy alkalmazását megakadályozza. Ha bármelyik Szerződő Fél úgy gondolja, hogy a viteldíj nem összeegyeztethető jelen cikk (3) bekezdésében foglalt megfontolásokkal, konzultációt kezdeményezhet és értesítheti a másik Szerződő Felet elégedetlenségének okairól. Az ilyen konzultációkat az értesítés átvételétől számított legkésőbb tizennégy (14) napon belül meg kell tartani. A viteldíj hatályba lép vagy hatályban marad mindaddig, amíg a felek közös megegyezésre nem jutnak.

(6) A jelen cikk sérelme nélkül Katar Állam által kijelölt légitársaságok által kiszabott viteldíjak az Európai Unió egész területén történő szállításra vonatkozóan az Európai Unió joga hatálya alá tartoznak.

10. Cikk

Adatok szolgáltatása

A Szerződő Felek légügyi hatóságainak rendelkezésre kell bocsátani, vagy a másik Szerződő Fél légügyi hatóságai kérhetik, hogy bocsássák rendelkezésre az adott időszakra vonatkozó vagy egyéb nyilatkozatokat olyan adatokról, amelyek ésszerűen megkérhetőek annak érdekében, hogy felülvizsgálják a menetrend szerinti üzemelés során a Szerződő Felek által kijelölt légitársaságok által biztosított kapacitást, amire a jelen cikk hivatkozik. Az ilyen nyilatkozatoknak tartalmazniuk kell minden olyan információt, amely szükséges a kijelölt légitársaságok által a menetrend szerinti üzemelés során szállított forgalom valamint ezen forgalom kiindulási és érkezési pontjának meghatározásához.

11. Cikk

Pénzeszközök átutalása

(1) Minden kijelölt légitársaságnak biztosítani kell a jogot arra, hogy légiközlekedési szolgáltatást értékesítsen a másik Szerződő Fél területén közvetlenül és, annak diszkrecionális jogán alapulóan, ügynökeiken keresztül. Minden kijelölt légitársaságnak joga van arra, hogy légiközlekedési szolgáltatást adjon el és bármely személy szabadon vásárolhat meg ilyen szolgáltatást az adott területen használt pénznemben vagy az ott konvertibilis pénznemekben. Jelen bekezdés rendelkezései a nemzeti jogszabályok és rendelkezések hatálya alá tartoznak.

(2) Mindkét Szerződő Fél megadja a jogot a másik Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaságoknak, hogy szabadon átutalják az adott állam területén megszerzett, kiadásaikat meghaladó többletbevételeiket. Az ilyen utalást a folyó kifizetésekre érvényes hivatalos árfolyam alapján kell elvégezni, vagy ahol nincs hivatalos árfolyam, ott az ilyen utalást a folyó kifizetésekre vonatkozó érvényes devizapiaci árfolyam alapján kell elvégezni, annak a napnak a figyelembevételével, amikor a másik Szerződő Fél által kijelölt légitársaságok az átutalás iránti kérelmet benyújtották és az utalást a bank által ilyen tranzakciók esetén felszámított normál szolgáltatásokra érvényes díjakon felül nem terhelhetik egyéb más díjak.

12. Cikk

A légiközlekedés védelme

(1) A Szerződő Felek a nemzetközi jogból eredő jogaikkal és kötelezettségeikkel összhangban megerősítik, hogy a polgári légiközlekedés biztonságának jogellenes cselekményektől való megvédésére vonatkozó egymás iránti elkötelezettségük jelen Megállapodás elválaszthatatlan részét képezi. Anélkül, hogy korlátoznák egymás nemzetközi jogból eredő jogait és kötelezettségeit, a Szerződő Felek kiemelt figyelmet fordítanak arra, hogy az Egyezmény és mellékleteinek, a légi járművek fedélzetén elkövetett bűncselekményekről és egyéb cselekményekről szóló, 1963. szeptember 14-én Tokióban aláírt egyezménynek, a légi járművek jogellenes hatalomba kerítésének leküzdéséről szóló, 1970. december 16-án Hágában aláírt egyezménynek, a polgári légiközlekedés biztonsága elleni jogellenes cselekmények leküzdéséről szóló, 1971. szeptember 23-án Montrealban aláírt egyezménynek, a polgári légiközlekedést szolgáló nemzetközi repülőtereken elkövetett erőszakos jogellenes cselekmények leküzdéséről szóló, 1988. február 24-én Montrealban aláírt jegyzőkönyvnek, és bármely egyéb olyan légiközlekedés védelméről szóló egyezménnyel összhangban járnak el, ami rájuk nézve kötelező érvényű.

(2) A Szerződő Felek kérés esetén minden szükséges segítséget megadnak egymásnak a polgári légi járművek jogellenes hatalomba kerítésére irányuló cselekmények, és más, az ilyen légi járművek, azok utasai és személyzete, valamint a repülőterek és a léginavigációs berendezések biztonsága elleni jogellenes cselekmények, továbbá bármely, a polgári légi közlekedés biztonsága ellen irányuló fenyegetés megelőzése érdekében.

(3) A Szerződő Felek egymás közötti kapcsolataikban a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Szervezet által megállapított és az Egyezmény mellékleteit képező, a légiközlekedés védelmére vonatkozó rendelkezéseknek megfelelően járnak el, amennyiben e védelmi rendelkezések a Szerződő Felekre nézve alkalmazandóak; a Szerződő Felek megkövetelik, hogy a területükön bejegyzett légijármű-üzembentartók, valamint azon üzembentartók, amelyek fő telephelye vagy állandó lakhelye a területükön van, vagy Magyarország esetében az EU-szerződések értelmében a területén került bejegyzésre és az európai uniós jognak megfelelő érvényes működési engedéllyel rendelkező légijármű- üzembentartók, továbbá a felek területén lévő repülőterek üzembentartói a szóban forgó légiközlekedés-védelmi rendelkezéseknek megfelelően járnak el.

(4) A Szerződő Felek megállapodnak abban, hogy az ilyen légijármű-üzembentartóknak előírják, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél területéről történő felszállás és annak területén történő üzemelés során az abban az országban hatályos - Magyarország esetében beleértve az európai uniós jogot is - repülésvédelmi rendelkezéseknek megfelelően üzemeljenek.

Mindkét Szerződő Fél hatékony intézkedések megtételét biztosítja saját területén, a légi járművek védelme, valamint az utasok, a személyzet, poggyászuk és kézipoggyászuk átvizsgálása, továbbá a rakománynak és a légi járművön található készleteknek a beszállás, illetve a berakodás előtt történő átvizsgálása érdekében. A Szerződő Felek egyetértenek abban is, hogy méltányos megfontolás tárgyává teszik a másik Szerződő Fél az egyes konkrét fenyegetéssel szembeni különleges védelmi intézkedések megtételére irányuló kérelmét.

(5) Polgári légijármű jogellenes hatalomba kerítése, illetve ilyen veszély fennállása, vagy más, a légijármű, az utasok, a személyzet, a repülőterek vagy a léginavigációs berendezések biztonsága elleni jogellenes cselekmény vagy annak veszélye esetén a Szerződő Felek segítséget nyújtanak egymásnak a kommunikáció elősegítése és más, az ilyen cselekmény vagy veszély lehető leggyorsabb és biztonságos megszüntetésére szolgáló megfelelő intézkedések megtétele révén.

(6) Amennyiben valamelyik Szerződő Félnek kifogása merül fel ezen cikk légiközlekedés védelmére vonatkozó rendelkezéseivel kapcsolatban, bármely Szerződő Fél légügyi hatósága kérhet sürgős konzultációt a másik Szerződő Fél légügyi hatóságától. Amennyiben nem sikerül közös megegyezésre jutni harminc (30) napon belül, az jogalapot szolgáltat a jelen Megállapodás (5) Cikkének alkalmazására.

13. Cikk

Bizonyítványok és engedélyek elismerése

A Szerződő Felek a menetrend szerinti üzemelés céljából érvényesnek ismerik el a másik Szerződő Fél jogszabályai és rendelkezései szerint, Magyarország esetében az európai uniós jogszabályok és rendelkezések szerint kiadott vagy érvényesített légialkalmassági bizonyítványokat, személyzeti alkalmassági bizonyítványokat és engedélyeket, amennyiben az e bizonyítványokkal vagy engedélyekkel szemben támasztott követelmények teljesítik az Egyezmény értelmében meghatározott minimumszabályokat vagy azoknál többet. A Szerződő Felek fenntartják a jogot arra, hogy megtagadják a másik Szerződő Fél által a saját állampolgárai részére kiadott személyzeti alkalmassági bizonyítványok és engedélyek érvényességének elismerését, a saját területük feletti repülés végrehajtására.

14. Cikk

A légiközlekedés biztonsága

(1) A Szerződő Felek bármikor konzultációt kérhetnek a másik Szerződő Fél által elfogadott biztonsági előírásokat illetően, bármilyen területen, a léginavigációs berendezésekre, a légi járművek személyzetére, a légi járművekre vagy azok üzemeltetésére vonatkozóan. Az ilyen konzultációkat a kéréstől számított harminc (30) napon belül meg kell tartani.

(2) Amennyiben az ilyen konzultációkat követően az egyik Szerződő Fél megállapítja, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél az említett területeken ténylegesen nem tart fenn, és nem alkalmaz olyan biztonsági előírásokat és követelményeket, amelyek az Egyezmény alapján abban az időben megállapított minimumszabályokkal legalább azonosak, e Szerződő Fél értesíti a másik Szerződő Felet a megállapításokról, és az ezen minimumszabályoknak való megfeleléshez szükségesnek vélt intézkedésekről és a másik Szerződő Fél pedig megteszi a megfelelő korrekciós intézkedést. Amennyiben a másik Szerződő Félnek tizenöt (15) napon belül, vagy esetlegesen hosszabb elfogadott időtartamon belül nem sikerül megtennie a szükséges intézkedéseket, az alapul szolgál a jelen Egyezmény 5. Cikkének alkalmazására.

(3) Az Egyezmény (33) cikkében megállapított kötelezettségek sérelme nélkül Szerződő Felek megállapodnak abban, hogy az egyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága által üzemeltetett légi járműveket, melyek a másik Szerződő Fél területére érkezve vagy onnan kiindulva nyújtanak szolgáltatásokat, a másik Szerződő Fél meghatalmazott képviselői az adott Szerződő Fél területén történő tartózkodás során a fedélzetre és a légi jármű környékére kiterjedő vizsgálatnak vessék alá, melynek célja a légi jármű és személyzete okmányai érvényességének valamint a légi jármű és annak berendezései általános állapotának ellenőrzése (e cikkben: „forgalmi előtéri ellenőrzés”), feltéve, hogy ez nem eredményez indokolatlan késedelmet.

(4) Amennyiben a forgalmi előtéri ellenőrzés vagy a forgalmi előtéri ellenőrzések sorozata súlyos aggályokat kelt azzal kapcsolatosan:

a. hogy a légi jármű vagy a légi jármű üzemeltetése nem felel meg az adott időpontban az Egyezmény alapján meghatározott minimumkövetelményeknek; vagy

b. hogy ténylegesen nem tartanak fenn, és nem alkalmaznak olyan biztonsági előírásokat és követelményeket, amelyeket az Egyezmény alapján abban az időben megállapítottak;

az ellenőrzést végző Szerződő Fél, az Egyezmény 33. cikke értelmében, szabadon megállapíthatja, hogy azok a követelmények, amelyek alapján a légi járműre vagy a légi jármű személyzetére vonatkozó bizonyítványokat vagy engedélyeket kiadták vagy érvényesítették, vagy azok a követelmények, amelyek alapján a légi járművet üzemeltetik, nem felelnek meg az Egyezmény szerint meghatározott minimum-, vagy a feletti követelményeknek.

(5) Abban az esetben, ha az egyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága által üzemeltetett légi járműhöz való hozzáférést a jelen cikk (3) bekezdése értelmében történő forgalmi előtéri ellenőrzés elvégezése céljára megtagadja azon légitársaság képviselője, a másik Szerződő Fél szabadon következtethet arra, hogy a jelen cikk (4) bekezdése szerinti súlyos aggályok merülnek fel és levonhatja az azon bekezdésben hivatkozott következtetéseket.

(6) A Szerződő Felek fenntartják a jogot a másik Szerződő Fél légitársasága vagy légitársasági üzemelési engedélyének azonnali felfüggesztésére vagy módosítására abban az esetben, ha az adott Szerződő Fél, akár a forgalmi előtéri ellenőrzés, konzultáció vagy egyéb eredményeképpen arra a következtetésre jut, hogy azonnali intézkedés szükséges a légitársaság biztonságos üzemelése érdekében.

(7) A jelen cikk (2) vagy (6) bekezdése értelmében a Szerződő Felek minden intézkedését meg kell szüntetni, amint az azon intézkedés meghozatalának alapja megszűnik.

(8) Ha Magyarország olyan légitársaságot jelölt ki, amelynek szabályozói felügyeletét egy másik EU-tagállam látja el és gyakorolja, a Katari Államot a jelen cikk szerint megillető jogok a biztonsági előírásoknak az adott másik EU-tagállam általi elfogadása, végrehajtása és betartása, valamint az adott légitársaság üzemeltetési engedélye tekintetében ugyanúgy érvényesülnek.

15. Cikk

Jogszabályok és rendelkezések alkalmazása

(1) Az egyik Szerződő Fél területére történő, nemzetközi légiközlekedésben részt vevő légijárművek belépésére, ott-tartózkodására, valamint kilépésére, a légijárművek üzemelésére és navigálására vonatkozó jogszabályokat és rendelkezéseket a másik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársaságai által használt légi járműveknek be kell tartaniuk az adott területre történő be-, kilépés és ott tartózkodás során.

(2) Az egyik Szerződő Fél területére történő belépéskor, átszálláskor, ott-tartózkodáskor, valamint kilépéskor a másik Szerződő Fél légitársaságai által szállított utasoknak, poggyásznak, személyzetnek vagy árunak meg kell felelniük a légi járműben szállított utasoknak, poggyásznak, személyzetnek vagy árunak az adott Szerződő Fél területére történő belépésére, valamint onnan történő kilépésére vonatkozó, az adott Szerződő Fél területén alkalmazandó jogszabályoknak és rendelkezéseknek, beleértve a belépéssel, vámkezeléssel, átszállással, bevándorlással, útlevelekkel, vámeljárásokkal, pénznemekkel, egészségügyi intézkedésekkel, vagy karanténnal, illetve, postai küldemények esetén, a postai szolgáltatásokkal kapcsolatos jogszabályoknak és rendelkezéseknek.

(3) Egyik Szerződő Fél sem részesítheti előnyben a saját légitársaságát vagy bármely más légitársaságot a másik Szerződő Fél olyan kijelölt légitársaságával szemben, amely az övéhez hasonló légi szolgáltatást nyújt azon jogszabályok és rendelkezések alkalmazása során, amelyeket a jelen cikk (1) és (2) bekezdése határoz meg, vagy pedig az ellenőrzése alatt álló repülőterek, légiútvonalak, léginavigációs szolgálatok és az ahhoz rendelt felszerelések használatakor.

16. Cikk

A légitársasági képviselet

(1) Bármelyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársaságának meg kell adni a viszonosság elve alapján a jogot arra, hogy a másik Szerződő Fél területére behozza és fenntartsa a saját képviselőit valamint a kereskedelmi, igazgatási és műszaki személyzetét a menetrend szerinti üzemeléssel kapcsolatban.

(2) Ezek a személyzeti követelmények, a kijelölt légitársaság döntése alapján, kielégíthetőek bármilyen nemzetiségű saját személyzettel vagy bármely, a másik Szerződő Fél területén üzemelő szervezet, cég vagy légitársaság bármilyen szolgáltatásának használatával, amely engedéllyel rendelkezik ilyen szolgáltatások nyújtására az adott Szerződő Fél területén.

(3) A képviselők és a személyzet a másik Szerződő Fél területén hatályos jogszabályok és rendelkezések alá tartozik.

A hatályos jogszabályokkal és rendelkezésekkel összhangban mindkét Szerződő Fél megadja a viszonosság elve alapján és a lehető legrövidebb időn belül a szükséges munkavállalási engedélyeket, munkavállalói vízumokat és az ezekhez hasonló dokumentumokat a jelen Cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott képviselőknek és személyzetnek.

(4) A belső jogi rendelkezések által megengedett mértékig a Szerződő Felek nem követelik meg a munkavállalási engedélyeket vagy a munkavállalói vízumokat vagy az ezekhez hasonló dokumentumokban olyan személyzettől, akik csak ideiglenesen nyújtanak szolgáltatásokat vagy végeznek el feladatokat.

17. Cikk

A közös üzemeltetésre vonatkozó rendelkezések

(1) A megjelölt útvonalakon történő menetrend szerinti üzemelés vagy annak értékesítése során az egyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága, legyen akár üzemeltető légitársaság („operating airline”) akár marketing légitársaság („marketing airline”), az őt kijelölő és engedélyező Szerződő Fél jogszabályai és rendelkezései alapján együttműködési megállapodást köthet, beleértve, de nem korlátozva az alábbiakra:

a. az ugyanazon Szerződő Fél légitársaságával vagy légitársaságaival;

b. a másik Szerződő Fél bármely kijelölt légitársaságával; vagy

c. egy harmadik Fél légitársaságával vagy légitársaságaival. Amennyiben az ilyen harmadik Fél nem engedélyez a másik Szerződő Fél légitársaságai és más légitársaságok között hasonló megállapodásokat, ezen harmadik országba irányuló, onnan induló és azon keresztül végzett üzemelés esetén, az említett másik Szerződő Fél légügyi hatósága jogosult arra, hogy ne fogadja el ezeket a megállapodásokat.

(2) A jelen Cikk (1) bekezdésében megállapított jogosultságok csak akkor gyakorolhatóak, amennyiben:

a. minden légitársaság a megfelelő forgalmi jogokat gyakorolja és arról az érintett légügyi hatóságokat értesítették.

b. minden eladott jegyre vonatkozóan a légitársaság felvilágosítást ad a jegy vásárlójának a vásárlás helyén arról, hogy melyik légitársaság fog üzemelni a szolgáltatás minden egyes szakaszán és hogy a vásárló ezáltal melyik légitársasággal vagy légitársaságokkal lép szerződéses jogviszonyba.

(3) Azon közös üzemelési szolgáltatások, amelyet valamelyik Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársasága mint marketing légitársaság („marketing airline”) lát el, nem számítható bele a légitársaságot kijelölő Szerződő Felet megillető frekvenciákba és a kapacitásba.

18. Cikk

Konzultáció

(1) A Szerződő Felek Légügyi Hatóságai kötelesek időről időre konzultálni egymással, hogy biztosítsák a szoros együttműködést jelen Megállapodás és Függelékei alkalmazásával, rendelkezéseinek való megfelelőséggel kapcsolatos kérdésekben.

(2) Az ilyen konzultációkat a légügyi hatóságok között, az írásbeli kérelemnek a másik Szerződő Fél általi kézhez vételétől számított hatvan (60) napon belül meg kell kezdeni, hacsak erről a Szerződő Felek másképp nem egyeznek meg.

19. Cikk

Viták rendezése

(1) Szerződő Felek között a jelen Megállapodás értelmezésére vagy alkalmazására vonatkozó bármely vita esetén, a Szerződő Felek kötelesek megkísérelni elsőként az egymás között folytatott, tárgyalásos rendezést.

(2) Amennyiben a Szerződő Felek nem képesek tárgyalással rendezni a vitát, megegyezhetnek abban, hogy a vitát döntéshozatalra átadják egy másik személynek, vagy testületnek; ha nincs ilyen megegyezés, bármelyik Szerződő Fél kérésére egy 3 tagú választottbírákból álló bíróság elé terjesztik a kérelmet, amelyből 1-1 főt a Szerződő Feleknek kell jelölniük, míg a 3. főt az előbbi 2 jelölt együttesen jelöli.

Mindkét Szerződő Fél köteles kinevezni egy választottbírót a vita választott bíróság általi elbírálásáról szóló kérelem diplomáciai útvonalon történő kézhez vételétől számított hatvan (60) napon belül, míg a 3 bírót újabb hatvan (60) napon belül kell kijelölni.

Amennyiben valamelyik Szerződő Félnek nem sikerül bírót kineveznie az említett határidőn belül, vagy nem sikerül 3. bírót kijelölni vagy az említett időn belül, úgy a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Szervezet Tanácsának Elnöke nevez ki bármely Szerződő Fél kérésére bírót vagy bírókat, ahogyan a helyzet azt megkívánja. Amennyiben az Elnök valamelyik Szerződő Fél állampolgárságával bír, akkor annak a rangidős elnökhelyettesnek kell elvégeznie a jelölést, akinél nem lép fel semmilyen kizáró ok. Ebben az esetben a harmadik bírónak egy harmadik állam állampolgárának kell lennie és ő jár el a választottbíróság elnökeként.

(3) A választottbíróság határozza meg bíráskodásának kereteit a jelen Megállapodással összhangban, valamint a saját eljárásrendjét.

(4) A választottbíróság jelen cikk (2) bekezdése alapján meghozott döntése kötelező a vitában érintett Szerződő Felekre nézve.

(5) Amennyiben valamelyik Szerződő Fél nem tartja be a döntést, úgy az jogalapot ad a másik Szerződő Félnek a jelen Megállapodás 5. Cikkének alkalmazására.

(6) Mindkét Szerződő Fél viseli a saját maga által jelölt bíró költségeit. Az egyéb, a bíróságot érintő költségeket és kiadásokat a Szerződő Felek egyenlő arányban osztják el egymás közt.

20. Cikk

A megállapodás módosítása

(1) Amennyiben bármely Szerződő Fél szükségesnek tartja a jelen Megállapodás rendelkezéseinek módosítását, amennyiben arról Szerződő Felek között egyetértés van, és ha szükséges, a 18. Cikk szerinti konzultációt követően, a módosítás akkor lép hatályba, ha a Szerződő Felek diplomáciai levelezésben rögzítik, hogy a módosítás hatályba lépésére vonatkozó belső jogi követelmények teljesültek.

(2) A jelen Megállapodás Függelékének módosításához a Szerződő Felek légügyi hatóságainak közvetlen megállapodása szükséges. Az ilyen módosítások ideiglenesen alkalmazhatók a légügyi hatóságok által közösen megállapított dátumtól kezdve és e megállapodás 24. Cikkének megfelelően lépnek hatályba.

21. Cikk

Nyilvántartásba vétel a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Szervezetnél

A jelen Megállapodás és az ahhoz csatolt módosítások nyilvántartásba vételre kerülnek a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Szervezetnél.

22. Cikk

Többoldalú Egyezményekkel való összhang

Amennyiben egy, a mindkét Szerződő Felet érintő többoldalú légiközlekedési egyezmény lép hatályba, a jelen Megállapodást és annak Függelékének vonatkozó rendelkezéseit aszerint módosítani kell.

23. Cikk

Felmondás

Bármely Szerződő Fél bármikor tájékoztathatja diplomáciai úton írásban a másik Szerződő Felet arról, hogy a Szerződés felmondása mellett döntött; ezt a tájékoztatást egyidejűleg el kell juttatni a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Szervezethez is, ilyen esetben a jelen Megállapodás megszűnik a tájékoztatás másik Szerződő Fél által történő kézhezvételét követő tizenkét (12) hónap múlva kivéve, ha a fenti időszakon belül a jelen Megállapodás megszűnésére vonatkozó értesítést visszavonják. Amennyiben a másik Szerződő Fél nem ismeri el a felmondásról szóló értesítés kézhezvételét, úgy kell tekinteni, mintha azt az értesítést a Nemzetközi Polgári Repülési Szervezet általi kézhezvétel után tizennégy (14) nappal kapta volna meg.

24. Cikk

Hatályba lépés

Jelen Megállapodás a Szerződő Felek vonatkozó jogi eljárásainak megfelelően kerül jóváhagyásra. Továbbá mindkét Szerződő Fél értesíti a másik Szerződő Felet diplomáciai csatornákon keresztül arról, hogy befejeződött az alkotmányos eljárási követelményeik teljesítése. A jelen Megállapodás az erről szóló későbbi értesítés kézhez vételétől számított harmincadik napon lép hatályba.

Jelen Megállapodás hatályba lépésével a Magyar Köztársaság Kormánya és Katar Állam Kormánya között, 2002. június 12-én aláírt légiközlekedési megállapodás hatályát veszti.

A fentiek hiteléül, a Kormányaik által kellően felhatalmazott alulírottak aláírták a jelen Megállapodást.

Készült két példányban, Dohában 2016. október hó 10. napján, magyar, arab és angol nyelven, mindegyik szöveg egyaránt hiteles. Eltérő értelmezés esetén az angol szöveg az irányadó.

 Magyarország Kormánya nevében

 Katar Állam Kormánya nevében

Függelék

Útvonalak 1.

A Magyarország által kijelölt légitársaságok által üzemeltethető útvonalak: 

 KIINDULÁSI PONT

 KÖZBENSŐ PONTOK

 CÉLPONT

 TÚLI PONTOK

 Bármely pont Magyarországon

 Bármely pont

 Bármely pont Katarban

 Bármely pont

Útvonalak 2.

Katar Állam által kijelölt légitársaságok által üzemeltethető útvonalak: 

 KIINDULÁSI PONT

 KÖZBENSŐ PONTOK

 CÉLPONT

 TÚLI PONTOK

 Bármely pont Katarban

 Bármely pont

 Bármely pontMagyarországon

 Bármely pont

Megjegyzés:

A megjelölt útvonalakon lévő bármely pont vagy pontok kihagyhatóak mindkét Szerződő Fél kijelölt légitársaságai által vagy bármilyen sorrendben üzemeltethetőek bármelyik vagy mindegyik járat esetében, amennyiben az indulás vagy az érkezés pontja az állampolgárságuk szerinti ország területén van.”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és a 3. § a Megállapodás 24. cikkében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Megállapodás, a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter - annak ismertté válását követően - a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a közlekedésért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.