2016. évi V. törvény

a Magyarország Kormánya és a Koreai Köztársaság Kormánya között a katonai minősített adatok cseréjéről és kölcsönös védelméről szóló egyezmény kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és a Koreai Köztársaság Kormánya között a katonai minősített adatok cseréjéről és kölcsönös védelméről szóló egyezmény (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés az Egyezményt e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § Az Egyezmény hiteles angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF HUNGARY AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA ON THE EXCHANGE AND MUTUAL PROTECTION OF CLASSIFIED MILITARY INFORMATION

The Government of Hungary and the Government of the Republic of Korea (hereinafter referred to as the „Parties”),

Recognising the importance of mutual cooperation between the Parties,

Realising that beneficial cooperation may require exchange of Classified Military Information between the Parties,

Recognising that they can ensure equivalent protection for Classified Military Information,

Wishing to ensure the protection of Classified Military Information exchanged between them or between the legal entities or individuals under their jurisdiction, and

On the basis of mutual respect for their national interests and security,

Have agreed as follows:

ARTICLE 1

OBJECTIVE AND APPLICABILITY OF THE AGREEMENT

1. The objective of this Agreement is to ensure the protection of Classified Military Information exchanged or generated in the course of cooperation between the Parties.

2. This Agreement shall not affect the obligations of the Parties under any other bilateral or multilateral treaty to which they are party, including any agreements governing the exchange and mutual protection of Classified Military Information.

ARTICLE 2

DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement:

a) „Breach of Security” means an act or an omission which is contrary to this Agreement or to the national laws and regulations of the Parties, the result of which may lead to the disclosure, loss, destruction, misappropriation or any other type of compromise of Classified Military Information;

b) „Classified Contract” means a contract that involves or requires access to Classified Military Information;

c) „Classified Military Information” means any kind of military information that, regardless of its form or nature, under the national laws and regulations of either Party, requires protection against a Breach of Security and has been duly designated;

d) „Contractor” means an individual or a legal entity possessing the legal capacity to conclude Classified Contracts in accordance with the relevant national laws and regulations;

e) „Facility Security Clearance” means the determination by a National Security Authority of a Party that a legal entity or an individual, possessing the legal capacity, has the physical and organizational capability to handle and store Classified Military Information in accordance with the relevant national laws and regulations;

f) „National Security Authority” means the state authority responsible for the application and supervision of this Agreement;

g) „Designated Security Authority” means the state authority responsible for the implementation of this Agreement specifically regarding technical matters concerning Classifed Military Information;

h) „Need-to-Know” means the principle, according to which access to Classified Military Information may only be granted to a person who has a verified need to access this Classified Military Information in connection with his/her official duties or for the performance of a specific task;

i) „Originating Party” means the Party which releases Classified Military Information;

j) „Personnel Security Clearance” means the determination by the National Security Authority of a Party that an individual is eligible to have access to Classified Military Information in accordance with the national laws and regulations;

k) „Recipient Party” means the Party which receives Classified Military Information;

l) „Sub-contract” means a contract entered into by a Contractor with another contractor (the Sub-contractor) for the provision of goods or services;

m) „Sub-contractor” means an individual or a legal entity with whom a Contractor enters into a Sub-contract;

n) „Third Party” means any state, including the legal entities or individuals under its jurisdiction, or international organisation not being a party to this Agreement.

ARTICLE 3

NATIONAL SECURITY AUTHORITIES

1. The National Security Authorities of the Parties are:

a. for Hungary:

National Security Authority

b. for the Republic of Korea:

Defense Intelligence Agency

2. The Designated Security Authorities of the Parties are:

a. for Hungary:

Defence Staff of the Hungarian Defence Forces CIS & Information Security Directorate, Ministry of Defence

b. for the Republic of Korea: Defense Intelligence Agency

3. The National Security Authorities shall provide each other with their official contact details and the contact details of the Designated Security Authorities and shall inform each other of any subsequent changes thereto.

4. The National Security Authorities of the Parties shall coordinate with each other regarding all required guidelines and procedures related to the implementation of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 4

SECURITY CLASSIFICATION LEVELS AND MARKINGS

ARTICLE 5

ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED MILITARY INFORMATION

Access to Classified Military Information under this Agreement shall be limited to individuals who have a Need-to-know and who are duly authorised in accordance with the national laws and regulations of the respective Party.

ARTICLE 6

SECURITY PRINCIPLES

1. The Originating Party shall:

a) ensure that Classified Military Information is marked with the appropriate security classification markings in accordance with its national laws and regulations;

b) inform the Recipient Party of any usage conditions of Classified Military Information;

c) inform the Recipient Party in writing without undue delay of any subsequent changes in the security classification level or duration of classification.

2. The Recipient Party shall:

a) ensure that received Classified Military Information is marked with an equivalent security classification marking in accordance with Article 4 of this Agreement;

b) afford the same degree of protection to received Classified Military Information as afforded to its own Classified Military Information of an equivalent security classification level;

c) ensure protection to received Classified Military Information equivalent to its classification level until it receives a written notification from the Originating Party about its declassification or a change in the security classification level or validity of the Classified Military Information;

d) ensure that received Classified Military Information is not released to any Third Party without the prior written consent of the Originating Party;

e) use received Classified Military Information only for the purpose for which it has been released and in accordance with release conditions of the Originating Party.

ARTICLE 7

SECURITY CO-OPERATION

1. In order to maintain comparable standards of security, the National Security Authorities shall, on request, inform each other of their national laws and regulations concerning the protection of Classified Military Information and the practices stemming from their implementation.

2. On request, the National Security Authorities shall, in accordance with their national laws and regulations, assist each other during the Personnel Security Clearance procedures and Facility Security Clearance procedures.

3. On request, the Parties shall in accordance with their national laws and regulations, recognise the Personnel Security Clearance and Facility Security Clearance Certificates issued by the other Party. Article 4 of this Agreement shall apply accordingly.

4. The National Security Authorities shall promptly notify each other about changes in the recognised Personnel Security Clearances and Facility Security Clearances, especially in case of their withdrawal.

5. The co-operation under this Agreement shall be effected in the English language.

ARTICLE 8

CLASSIFIED CONTRACTS

1. Classified Contracts shall be concluded and implemented in accordance with the national laws and regulations of each Party. On request, the National Security Authorities shall confirm that proposed Contractors/Sub-contractors as well as individuals participating in pre-contractual negotiations or in the implementation of Classified Contracts have the appropriate Personnel Security Clearance Certficate or Facility Security Clearance Certificate.

2. Each National Security Authority may request its counterpart to carry out a security inspection at a facility located in the territory of the other Party to ensure the continuing protection of Classified Military Information.

3. Classified Contracts shall contain project security instructions on the security requirements and on the security classification level of each element of the Classified Contract. A copy of the project security instructions shall be forwarded to the National Security Authority of the Party under whose jurisdiction the Classified Contract is to be implemented.

ARTICLE 9

TRANSFER OR TRANSMISSION OF CLASSIFIED MILITARY INFORMATION

1. Classified Military Information shall be transfered in accordance with the national laws and regulations of the Originating Party through diplomatic channels.

2. The Parties may transmit Classified Military Information by electronic means in accordance with security procedures approved by the National Security Authorities in writing.

ARTICLE 10

REPRODUCTION, TRANSLATION AND DESTRUCTION OF CLASSIFIED MILITARY INFORMATION

1. Reproductions and translations of Classified Military Information released under this Agreement shall bear the appropriate security classification markings and shall be protected in the same manner as the originals. The number of reproductions shall be limited to that required for official purposes.

2. Translations of Classified Military Information released under this Agreement shall bear a note in the language of translation indicating that they contain Classified Military Information of the Originating Party.

3. In case of a crisis situation in which it is impossible to protect or to return the Classified Military Information to the Originating Party it shall be destroyed without undue delay. The National Security Authority of the Recipient Party shall notify the National Security Authority of the Originating Party in writing about the destruction of the Classified Military Information.

ARTICLE 11

VISITS

1. Visits requiring access to Classified Military Information shall be subject to the prior written consent of the National Security Authority of the host Party.

2. The National Security Authority of the visiting Party shall notify the National Security Authority of the host Party about the planned visit through a request for visit at least twenty days before the visit takes place. In urgent cases, the request for visit may be submitted at a shorter notice, subject to prior co-ordination between the National Security Authorities.

3. The request for visit shall contain:

a) visitor’s name, date and place of birth, nationality and passport/ID card number;

b) position of the visitor and specification of the legal entity represented;

c) visitor’s Personnel Security Clearance status and its validity;

d) date and duration of the visit and, in case of recurring visits, the total period of time covered by the visits;

e) purpose of the visit including the highest security classification level of Classified Military Information involved;

f) name and address of the facility to be visited, as well as the name, phone/fax number and e-mail address of its point of contact;

g) date, signature and stamping of the official seal of the National Security Authority.

4. The National Security Authorities may agree on a list of visitors entitled to recurring visits and further details of the recurring visits. Once such lists have been approved by the National Security Authorities, the dates of the visits shall be arranged directly between the visiting and host parties.

5. Classified Military Information acquired by a visitor shall be considered as Classified Military Information received under this Agreement.

6. Each Party shall guarantee the protection of the personal data of the visitors in accordance with its national laws and regulations.

ARTICLE 12

BREACH OF SECURITY

1. The National Security Authorities shall without undue delay inform each other in writing of any Breach of Security or suspicion thereof.

2. The National Security Authority of the Party where the Breach of Security has occurred, shall initiate an investigation of the incident without undue delay. The National Security Authority of the other Party shall, if required, co-operate in the investigation.

3. In any case, the National Security Authority of the Recipient Party shall inform the National Security Authority of the Originating Party in writing about the circumstances of the breach of security, the extent of the possible damage, the measures adopted for its mitigation and the outcome of the investigation.

ARTICLE 13

EXPENSES

Each Party shall bear its own expenses incurred in the course of the implementation of this Agreement.

ARTICLE 14

DISPUTE SETTLEMENT

Any Dispute regarding the interpretation or implementation of this Agreement shall be resolved by consultations and negotiations between the Parties, without recourse to outside jurisdiction.

ARTICLE 15

FINAL PROVISIONS

1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second month following the date of receipt of the last of the notifications between the Parties, through diplomatic channels, stating that their national legal requirements for the entry into force of this Agreement have been fulfilled.

2. This Agreement may be amended on the basis of the mutual written agreement of the Parties. Such amendments shall enter into force in accordance with the procedure set out in Paragraph 1 of this Article.

3. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period of time. Each Party is entitled to terminate this Agreement in writing at any time. In such a case, the validity of this Agreement shall expire six months after the day on which the other Party receives the written notice of the termination.

4. Regardless of the termination of this Agreement, all Classified Military Information exchanged or generated under this Agreement shall be protected in accordance with the provisions set forth herein until the Originating Party relieves the Recipient Party from this obligation in writing.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized by their respective Governments, have signed this agreement.

DONE in duplicate at Prague on the 3 December 2015, in the Hungarian, Korean and English languages, each text being equally authentic. In case of any divergence of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.

 For the Government ofHungary

 For the Government of theRepublic of Korea”

„EGYEZMÉNY MAGYARORSZÁG KORMÁNYA ÉS A KOREAI KÖZTÁRSASÁG KORMÁNYA KÖZÖTT A KATONAI MINŐSÍTETT ADATOK CSERÉJÉRŐL ÉS KÖLCSÖNÖS VÉDELMÉRŐL

Magyarország Kormánya és a Koreai Köztársaság Kormánya (a továbbiakban a „Felek”)

Elismerve a Felek közötti kölcsönös együttműködés jelentőségét,

Felismerve, hogy a Felek közötti előnyös együttműködés során szükség lehet katonai minősített adatok cseréjére,

Elismerve, hogy azonos szintű védelmet biztosíthatnak a katonai minősített adatok számára,

Kívánatosnak tartva, hogy a közöttük vagy a joghatóságuk alá tartozó jogi személyek és természetes személyek között kicserélt katonai minősített adatok megfelelő védelemben részesüljenek, és

Kölcsönösen tiszteletben tartva egymás nemzeti érdekekeit és a biztonságot, az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

1. CIKK

AZ EGYEZMÉNY CÉLJA ÉS ALKALMAZÁSI TERÜLETE

1. Jelen Egyezmény célja, hogy védelmet biztosítson a Felek közötti együttműködés során kicserélt vagy keletkezett katonai minősített adatok számára.

2. Jelen Egyezmény nem érinti a Felek olyan más, két-vagy többoldalú szerződésből származó kötelezettségeit, amelyeknek részesei, beleértve a katonai minősített információk cseréjéről és kölcsönös védelméről szóló megállapodásokat is.

2. CIKK

FOGALOMMEGHATÁROZÁSOK

Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában:

a) katonai minősített adat biztonságának megsértése: olyan tett vagy mulasztás, amely jelen Egyezménnyel vagy a Felek rájuk vonatkozó saját, nemzeti jogszabályainak és egyéb szabályainak rendelkezéseivel ellentétes, és amely a katonai minősített adat jogosulatlan nyilvánosságra hozatalát, elvesztését, megsemmisülését, jogosulatlan felhasználását, megszerzését vagy egyéb módon történő megsértését eredményezheti;

b) minősített szerződés: olyan szerződés, amely katonai minősített adatot tartalmaz, vagy amely alapján katonai minősített adathoz történő hozzáférés szükséges;

c) katonai minősített adat: megjelenési formájától vagy természetétől függetlenül, minden olyan katonai adat, amelyet bármelyik Fél nemzeti jogszabályai és egyéb szabályai szerint védelemben kell részesíteni a minősített adat biztonságának megsértésével szemben, és amelyet ennek megfelelően szabályos minősítéssel láttak el;

d) szerződést kötő: az a természetes személy vagy jogi személy, aki a minősített szerződés megkötésére a releváns nemzeti jogszabályok és egyéb szabályok szerint jogképességgel rendelkezik;

e) telephely biztonsági tanúsítvány: a nemzeti biztonsági hatóság azon döntése, amely szerint a jogképességgel rendelkező természetes személy vagy jogi személy a releváns nemzeti jogszabályokkal és egyéb szabályokkal összhangban rendelkezik a katonai minősített adatok kezelésére és tárolására való fizikai és szervezeti képességgel;

f) nemzeti biztonsági hatóság: az állami szerv, amely jelen Egyezmény végrehajtásáért és felügyeletéért felelős;

g) kijelölt biztonsági hatóság: az állami szerv, amely a katonai minősített adatot érintő technikai feladatok tekintetében jelen Egyezmény végrehajtásáért felelős;

h) szükséges ismeret: az a követelmény, amely alapján katonai minősített adathoz való hozzáférés csak annak a személynek biztosítható, akinek az adott katonai minősített adathoz való hozzáférés hivatali kötelessége vagy meghatározott feladata ellátásához igazoltan szükséges;

i) Átadó Fél: az a Fél, amelyik a katonai minősített adatot átadja;

j) személyi biztonsági tanúsítvány: a nemzeti biztonsági hatóság azon döntése, amely megállapítja, hogy egy természetes személy a nemzeti jogszabályokkal és egyéb szabályokkal összhangban hozzáférhet katonai minősített adatokhoz;

k) Átvevő Fél: az a Fél, amelyik a katonai minősített adatot átveszi;

l) alvállalkozói szerződés: a szerződő által, egy másik szerződővel (alvállalkozóval) kötött, termékek vagy szolgáltatások nyújtására irányuló szerződés;

m) alvállalkozó: olyan természetes személy vagy jogi személy, aki a szerződővel az alvállalkozói szerződést megköti;

n) harmadik fél: bármely olyan állam, - beleértve a joghatósága alá tartozó jogi személyeket vagy természetes személyeket - vagy nemzetközi szervezet, amely nem részese jelen Egyezménynek.

3. CIKK

NEMZETI BIZTONSÁGI HATÓSÁGOK

(1) A Felek nemzeti biztonsági hatóságai a következők:

a. Magyarországon:

Nemzeti Biztonsági Felügyelet

b. A Koreai Köztársaságban:

Védelmi Hírszerző Ügynökség

(2) A Felek kijelölt biztonsági hatóságai:

a. Magyarországon:

Honvédelmi Minisztérium, Honvéd Vezérkar Híradó Informatikai és Információvédelmi Csoportfőnökség

b. A Koreai Köztársaságban: Védelmi Hírszerző Ügynökség

(3) A nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok egymás rendelkezésére bocsátják hivatalos elérhetőségeiket és a kijelölt biztonsági hatóságok elérhetőségeit, és tájékoztatják egymást az ezekkel kapcsolatos valamennyi későbbi változásról.

(4) A nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok jelen Egyezmény végrehajtásával kapcsolatos valamennyi irányelv és eljárás megvalósítása során egyeztetnek egymással.

4. CIKK

MINŐSÍTÉSI SZINTEK MEGFELELTETÉSE ÉS JELÖLÉSEIK

5. CIKK

KATONAI MINŐSÍTETT ADATHOZ VALÓ HOZZÁFÉRÉS

Jelen Egyezmény alapján katonai minősített adathoz kizárólag olyan személyek kaphatnak hozzáférést, akik a szükséges ismeret elvének megfelelnek, és a rájuk vonatkozó nemzeti jogszabályoknak és egyéb szabályoknak megfelelően felhatalmazást kaptak.

6. CIKK

BIZTONSÁGI ALAPELVEK

(1) Az Átadó Fél:

a) biztosítja, hogy a katonai minősített adaton a nemzeti jogszabályai és egyéb szabályai rendelkezéseinek megfelelő minősítési szint feltüntetésre kerüljön;

b) tájékoztatja az átvevő felet a katonai minősített adat felhasználásával kapcsolatos esetleges feltételekről;

c) haladéktalanul írásban tájékoztatja az átvevő felet az adat minősítésében vagy érvényességi idejében bekövetkezett változásokról.

(2) Az Átvevő Fél:

a) biztosítja, hogy az átvett katonai minősített adaton feltüntetésre kerüljön jelen Egyezmény 4. cikke alapján meghatározott egyenértékű minősítési szint;

b) ugyanolyan szintű védelemben részesíti az átvett katonai minősített adatot, mint amelyet a saját, azonos minősítési szintű nemzeti katonai minősített adata számára biztosít;

c) mindaddig biztosítja az átvett katonai minősített adat minősítési szintjének megfelelő védelmet, amíg az Átadó Féltől az átvett katonai minősített adat minősítésének megszüntetéséről, illetve minősítési szintjének vagy érvényességi idejének megváltoztatásáról írásban tájékoztatást nem kap;

d) biztosítja, hogy az Átadó Fél előzetes írásbeli hozzájárulása nélkül az átvett katonai minősített adatot harmadik fél részére nem adja át;

e) az átadott katonai minősített adatot kizárólag az átadás során megjelölt célra használja fel, betartva az Átadó Fél által meghatározott, az adat felhasználásával kapcsolatos esetleges feltételeket.

7. CIKK

BIZTONSÁGI EGYÜTTMŰKÖDÉS

(1) Az összeegyeztethető szintű biztonsági követelmények fenntartása érdekében a nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok a másik Fél megkeresésére tájékoztatják egymást a katonai minősített adatok védelmével kapcsolatos nemzeti jogszabályokról és egyéb szabályokról, valamint mindezek gyakorlati alkalmazásáról.

(2) Megkeresés esetén a nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok, összhangban a nemzeti jogszabályaik és egyéb szabályaik rendelkezéseivel, kölcsönösen segítséget nyújtanak egymásnak a személyi biztonsági tanúsítványokkal és a telephely biztonsági tanúsítványokkal kapcsolatos eljárások során.

(3) A Felek megkeresés esetén nemzeti jogszabályaik és egyéb szabályaik rendelkezéseivel összhangban elismerik a másik Fél által kibocsátott személyi biztonsági tanúsítványokat és telephely biztonsági tanúsítványokat. Mindezek során a jelen Egyezmény 4. Cikkében foglaltak alkalmazandók.

(4) A nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok haladéktalanul értesítik egymást az elismert személyi biztonsági tanúsítványokkal és a telephely biztonsági tanúsítványokkal kapcsolatos változásokról, különösen azok visszavonásáról.

(5) Jelen Egyezmény alapján megvalósuló együttműködés angol nyelven történik.

8. CIKK

MINŐSÍTETT SZERZŐDÉSEK

(1) A minősített szerződéseket a Felek saját nemzeti jogszabályai és egyéb szabályai alapján kell megkötni és teljesíteni. A nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok megkeresésre megerősítik, hogy lehetséges szerződők/ alvállalkozók és a szerződéskötést megelőző tárgyalásokban vagy a minősített szerződések teljesítésében részt vevők rendelkeznek megfelelő személyi biztonsági tanúsítvánnyal vagy telephely biztonsági tanúsítvánnyal.

(2) Bármely nemzeti biztonsági hatóság kérheti a másik Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatóságától biztonsági ellenőrzés lefolytatását a katonai minősített adatok folyamatos védelmének biztosítása céljából a másik Fél országának területén működő létesítményben.

(3) A minősített szerződések kötelező részét képezi a projekt biztonsági utasítás, amely a biztonsági követelményeket és a szerződés egyes elemeinek minősítésével kapcsolatos rendelkezéseket határozza meg. A projekt biztonsági utasítás másolatát azon Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatósága részére kell továbbítani, amelynek joghatósága alatt a minősített szerződés végrehajtása történik.

9. CIKK

A KATONAI MINŐSÍTETT ADAT TOVÁBBÍTÁSA

(1) A katonai minősített adat továbbítása az Átadó Fél nemzeti jogszabályainak és egyéb szabályainak rendelkezései szerint, diplomáciai úton történik.

(2) A Felek a nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok által írásban jóváhagyott biztonsági eljárási rend szerint, elektronikus úton is továbbíthatnak katonai minősített adatot.

10. CIKK

A KATONAI MINŐSÍTETT ADAT SOKSZOROSÍTÁSA, KIVONATOLÁSA, FORDÍTÁSA ÉS MEGSEMMISÍTÉSE

(1) Jelen Egyezmény alapján átadott katonai minősített adatról készült másolatokon és fordításokon fel kell tüntetni a megfelelő minősítési jelölést és az így készült adatot ugyanolyan védelemben kell részesíteni, mint az eredeti katonai minősített adatot. A sokszorosított példányok számát a hivatalos célból szükséges minimumra kell korlátozni.

(2) Jelen Egyezmény alapján átadott katonai minősített adatról készült fordításokon a fordítás nyelvén fel kell tüntetni, hogy az az Átadó Fél katonai minősített adatát tartalmazza.

(3) Olyan válsághelyzet esetén, amely lehetetlenné teszi a katonai minősített adat védelmét vagy visszajuttatását az Átadó Félnek, a katonai minősített adatot haladéktalanul meg kell semmisíteni. A katonai minősített adat megsemmisítésről az Átvevő Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatósága írásban értesíti az Átadó Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatóságát.

11. CIKK

LÁTOGATÁSOK

(1) Katonai minősített adathoz való hozzáférést igénylő látogatásra a fogadó fél nemzeti biztonsági hatóságának előzetes írásbeli hozzájárulása alapján kerülhet sor.

(2) A látogatást kezdeményező fél nemzeti biztonsági hatósága a tervezett látogatásról a fogadó fél nemzeti biztonsági hatóságának legalább húsz nappal a látogatás időpontja előtt kérelmet küld. Sürgős esetben, a nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok előzetes egyeztetését követően a látogatásra vonatkozó megkeresés a látogatás kezdetéhez közelebbi időpontban is benyújtható.

(3) A látogatásra vonatkozó megkeresésnek az alábbiakat kell tartalmaznia:

a) a látogató neve, születési helye és ideje, állampolgársága, útlevelének vagy más személyazonosító igazolványának száma;

b) a látogató beosztásának és a látogató által képviselt intézménynek a megjelölése;

c) a látogató személyi biztonsági tanúsítványának szintje és érvényességi ideje;

d) a látogatás időpontja és időtartama, visszatérő látogatások esetén az egyes látogatások összesített időtartama,

e) a látogatás célja, beleértve a látogatással érintett legmagasabb minősítési szintű katonai minősített adat minősítési szintjét;

f) a meglátogatandó létesítmény neve és címe, valamint a kapcsolattartójának neve, telefonszáma/ fax száma és e-mail címe;

g) dátum, aláírás és a nemzeti biztonsági hatóság hivatalos pecsétjének lenyomata.

(4) A nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok közösen meghatározhatják a visszatérő látogatásra jogosult személyek listáját és a visszatérő látogatásokkal kapcsolatos részleteket. A visszatérő látogatók listájának nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok által való elfogadása után, a látogatások időpontjairól a látogató és fogadó fél közvetlenül állapodik meg.

(5) A látogató által megismert katonai minősített adatot úgy kell tekinteni, mint a jelen Egyezmény alapján átadott katonai minősített adatot.

(6) A Felek a nemzeti jogszabályaik és egyéb szabályaik rendelkezéseivel összhangban biztosítják a látogatók személyes adatainak védelemét.

12. CIKK

A KATONAI MINŐSÍTETT ADAT BIZTONSÁGÁNAK MEGSÉRTÉSE

(1) A nemzeti biztonsági hatóságok késedelem nélkül írásban tájékoztatják egymást a katonai minősített adat biztonságának megsértéséről vagy annak gyanúja esetén.

(2) Annak a Félnek a nemzeti biztonsági hatósága, ahol a katonai minősített adat biztonságának megsértése bekövetkezett, köteles késedelem nélkül kezdeményezni az esemény kivizsgálását. A másik Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatósága kérés esetén együttműködik a vizsgálat során.

(3) Az Átvevő Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatósága minden esetben írásban tájékoztatja az Átadó Fél nemzeti biztonsági hatóságát a katonai minősített adat biztonságának megsértésével kapcsolatos körülményekről, a kár lehetséges mértékéről, a kár enyhítése érdekében megtett intézkedésekről, valamint a vizsgálat eredményéről.

13. CIKK

KÖLTSÉGEK VISELÉSE

A Felek maguk viselik a jelen Egyezmény végrehajtásával összefüggésben felmerült költségeiket.

14. CIKK

VITARENDEZÉS

Jelen Egyezmény végrehajtásából vagy értelmezéséből fakadó vitákat a Felek egymás közötti egyeztetés vagy tárgyalás útján, külső igazságszolgáltatási fórum igénybevétele nélkül rendezik.

15. CIKK

ZÁRÓ RENDELKEZÉSEK

(1) Jelen Egyezmény a Felek által az Egyezmény hatálybalépéshez szükséges belső jogi feltételek teljesítésére vonatkozó, diplomáciai úton küldött utolsó írásbeli értesítés kézhezvételének napját követő második hónap első napján lép hatályba.

(2) Jelen Egyezmény a Felek kölcsönös egyetértésével írásban módosítható. A módosítások a jelen Cikk 1. pontjában foglaltaknak megfelelően lépnek hatályba.

(3) Jelen Egyezmény határozatlan időre jön létre. Bármelyik Fél jogosult jelen Egyezményt bármikor írásban felmondani. Felmondás esetén az Egyezmény a felmondásról szóló írásbeli értesítés másik Fél általi kézhezvételétől számított hat hónap elteltével hatályát veszti.

(4) Az Egyezmény megszűnésétől függetlenül az annak alapján átadott vagy keletkezett katonai minősített adatokat az Egyezményben meghatározott rendelkezések szerint kell védelemben részesíteni, mindaddig, amíg az Átadó Fél írásban felmentést nem ad az Átvevő Fél részére ezen kötelezettség alól.

Fentiek tanúbizonyságául, az alulírott és az erre felhatalmazott megbízottak jelen Egyezményt aláírásukkal látták el.

Készült Prágában, 2015. december 3-án, két eredeti példányban, magyar, koreai és angol nyelven, valamennyi szöveg egyaránt hiteles. Eltérés esetén az angol nyelvű szöveg az irányadó.

 .........................................................................................Magyarország Kormánya részéről

 .........................................................................................a Koreai Köztársaság Kormánya részéről”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és a 3. § az Egyezmény 15. Cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) Az Egyezmény, illetve a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter annak ismertté válását követően, a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a honvédelemért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.