2015. évi CC. törvény

a Magyarország és a Kazah Köztársaság között létrejött, az elítélt személyek átszállításáról szóló egyezmény kihirdetéséről

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad Magyarország és a Kazah Köztársaság között létrejött, az elítélt személyek átszállításáról szóló egyezmény (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés az Egyezményt e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § Az Egyezmény hiteles angol és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„Treaty between Hungary and the Republic of Kazakhstan on transfer of sentenced persons

Hungary and the Republic of Kazakhstan, hereinafter referred to as the „Parties”,

On the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and equality,

Desiring to strengthen judicial cooperation between the two States,

Aiming at sentences being served by sentenced persons in the States of their nationality in order to facilitate their further reintegration into society,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1.

Definitions

For purposes of this Treaty:

a) „Transferring Party” means the Party which would transfer or has transferred a sentenced person from its territory;

b) „Receiving Party” means the Party which would receive or has received a sentenced person into its territory;

c) „Sentenced Person” means the person sentenced to a fixed term of imprisonment or life imprisonment according to the criminal judgment imposed by a court of the Transferring Party;

d) „National” means a person who only has nationality of Hungary or nationality of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

Article 2.

General provisions

The Parties may - in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty - transfer sentenced persons to each other in order to execute the sentences imposed by the Transferring Party in the territory of the Receiving Party.

Article 3.

Central Authorities

1. For purposes of this Treaty, the Central Authorities designated by the Parties, shall interact directly.

2. Central Authorities are:

for Hungary - the Minister responsible for justice;

for the Republic of Kazakhstan - Prosecutor General’s Office of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

3. Each Party shall inform the other Party of any changes and amendments related to the Central Authorities through diplomatic channels.

Article 4.

Conditions for transfer

1. A sentenced person may be transferred only under the following conditions:

a) the sentenced person is a national of the Receiving Party;

b) the person is sentenced for actions which also constitute an offence according to the national law of the Receiving Party;

c) when the request for transfer is received, the sentence imposed against the sentenced person has come into effect and the remaining period of time to be served by the sentenced person is at least one year;

d) the transfer is consented to in writing by the sentenced person, or by the person’s legal representative in cases when the sentenced person is unable to consent on his or her own for reasons of age, physical or mental conditions;

e) both Parties agree on the transfer.

2. In exceptional cases, the Parties may agree to a transfer even if the remaining period of time to be served by the sentenced person is less than that as specified in Paragraph 1 c) of this Article.

Article 5.

Grounds for refusal of transfer

1. The transfer of the sentenced person shall be refused if:

a) one Party considers that the transfer would prejudice its sovereignty, security or public order, or is contrary to the fundamental principles of national law;

b) the sentence against the sentenced person was passed for an offence endangering state security;

c) the sentenced person is involved in ongoing judicial proceedings on the territory of the Transferring Party.

2. Each party may determine at its discretion whether or not to agree to the transfer requested by the other Party for reasons other than provided for in Paragraph 1 of this Article.

Article 6.

Request and reply

1. A sentenced person or his or her legal representative may apply to either Party for a transfer according to this Treaty. The Party which has received such an application shall notify the other Party of it in writing.

2. A request for transfer may be submitted by either Party. The requested Party shall promptly inform the requesting Party of its decision whether or not to agree to the requested transfer.

3. Requests and replies on the transfer shall be made in writing.

Article 7.

Provision of required documents and information

1. If a transfer is requested, the Transferring Party shall provide the following documents to the Receiving Party, unless either Party has already indicated, that it will not agree to the transfer:

a) the name, the date and place of birth, residence, and if available, the permanent address of the sentenced person;

b) the certified copy of the final sentence, and if available, any other relevant judgments, including provisions of law which they are based on;

c) data on served and remaining parts of the punishment, including pre-trial detention, and other data relevant to the enforcement of the sentence;

d) written consent to the transfer, which is specified in paragraph 1 d) of Article 4 of this Treaty;

e) information indicating state of health of the sentenced person;

f) data describing the behavior of the person during the serving of the sentence.

2. The Receiving Party provides the Transferring Party with the following documents:

a) documents certifying that the sentenced person is a national of the Receiving Party;

b) articles of the law of the Receiving Party indicating that the actions for which the sentence was passed against the sentenced person constitute a criminal offence;

c) data on procedures of enforcement of the sentence passed by the Transferring Party under the national law of the Receiving Party.

Article 8.

Notification to the sentenced person

1. Each Party shall, within its territory, notify the sentenced persons, to whom the Treaty is applicable, that they may be transferred in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty.

2. Each Party shall notify the sentenced persons in writing within its territory of the decisions made by the Transferring Party or the Receiving Party upon the request for transfer in accordance with Article 6 of this Treaty.

Article 9.

Consent of the sentenced person and its verification

1. The Transferring Party shall ensure that the sentenced person or his or her legal representative voluntarily gives consent to the transfer with full knowledge of its legal consequences and confirms such knowledge in the declaration of consent to the transfer. The procedure of giving such consent shall be governed by the national law of the Transferring Party.

2. Where the Receiving Party requests, the Transferring Party shall provide the opportunity to the Receiving Party to verify through a designated official that the sentenced person has expressed his or her consent in accordance with the conditions set out in paragraph 1 of this Article.

Article 10.

Surrender of the transferred person

In case an agreement on transfer is reached, the Parties shall determine the time, place and procedure of the transfer through consultations.

Article 11.

Enforcement of the sentence

1. After receiving the sentenced person, the Receiving Party shall, in accordance with its national law, continue to enforce the sentence imposed by the Transferring Party pursuant to the category and the duration of the sentence as determined by the Transferring Party.

2. If the category and the duration of the sentence as determined by the Transferring Party are incompatible with the national law of the Receiving Party, the Receiving Party shall convert the sentence to the penalty prescribed by its national law for a similar criminal offence. In case of such conversion:

a) the Receiving Party shall be bound by the facts established in the judgment of the Transferring Party;

b) the Receiving Party shall not convert a penalty of deprivation of liberty to a pecuniary sentence;

c) the conversion of the sentence by the Receiving Party shall, by its nature and as far as possible, correspond with the sentence of the Transferring Party;

d) the conversion of the sentence by the Receiving Party shall not aggravate the sentence of the Transferring Party, nor exceed the maximum duration of penalty applicable to a similar criminal offence prescribed by the national law of the Receiving Party;

e) the conversion of the sentence is not bound by the minimum duration of penalty applicable to a similar criminal offence prescribed by the national law of the Receiving Party; and

f) the period of time served in custody within the territory of the Transferring Party by the sentenced person shall be deducted.

3. In case of conversion of the sentence in accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article, the Receiving Party shall transmit a copy of the legal document on conversion to the Transferring Party without delay.

4. The Receiving Party has the right to apply reduction of sentence or parole to the sentenced person in accordance with its national law.

Article 12.

Retention of jurisdiction

1. For purposes of this Treaty the Transferring Party has the right to retain jurisdiction for review of the sentences passed by its courts.

2. In case of receiving from the Transferring Party a sentence reviewed in accordance with the paragraph 1 of this Article the Receiving Party shall enforce the reviewed judgment in accordance with its national law.

Article 13.

Application of pardon or amnesty

Either Party may, in accordance with its national law, grant pardon or amnesty to the sentenced person transferred and shall inform the other Party of this decision without delay.

Article 14.

Notification on enforcement of the sentence

The Receiving Party shall inform the Transferring Party of the enforcement of the sentence if:

a) the enforcement of the sentence is completed;

b) the sentenced person has escaped or died before the completion of the enforcement of the punishment;

c) the Transferring Party requests a special report.

Article 15.

Transit

1. Each Party may, in accordance with its national law, authorize the transit through its territory of persons transferred from a third State to the other Party for the further enforcement of his or her sentence.

2. The Receiving Party shall send to the other Party a request containing identity information of the person transited, information about his or her nationality and a brief summary of the facts related to the offence. The request and supplementary information shall be transmitted through the Central Authority or, in particularly urgent cases, through the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol). The transit request shall be accompanied by a copy of the document confirming the agreement on transfer of the transited person.

3. The transit State shall keep in custody the transited person on its territory.

4. Transit permission is not required if the transit is carried out by air and landing in the transit State is not foreseen. In case of such unscheduled landing on the territory of the transit State, the State requesting transit shall promptly notify the transit State and the latter shall keep the transited person in custody up to fifteen (15) days, pending the request for transit as provided by paragraph 2 of this Article.

Article 16.

Languages

For purposes of this Treaty, the Parties shall use their respective official languages and provide a translation into the official language of the other Party or into English.

Article 17.

Validity of documents

For purposes of this Treaty, any documents submitted by the Central Authority of one Party affixed with its signature and official seal shall be accepted by the authorities of the other Party without any further authentication or legalization.

Article 18.

Costs

1. The Receiving Party shall bear the costs of:

a) the transfer of the sentenced person, except the expenses incurred exclusively on the territory of the Transferring Party;

b) the enforcement of the sentence after the transfer.

2. Costs connected with transits shall be borne by the Party which requested the transit permission.

Article 19.

Compatibility with international treaties

This Treaty shall not affect the rights and obligations assumed by each Party in accordance with any international Treaty which they are party to.

Article 20.

Personal data protection

1. Without prejudice to paragraph 2 of this Article, personal data may be transmitted by the Parties, and may be processed by the Party to which the data have been transmitted only if it is necessary and proportionate for the purpose of transferring sentenced persons according to this Treaty.

2. Such data may however be processed for any other purpose if prior consent to that effect has been given by either the Party who transmitted the data, or by the person who is subject of the data. The consent shall be given in accordance with the national law of the Party transmitting personal data.

3. Any Party that transmits personal data as a result of the execution of the provisions of this Treaty may require the Party to which the data have been transmitted to give information on the processing of such data.

4. Without prejudice to paragraph 6 of this Article personal data transmitted under this Treaty shall be processed and deleted in line with the national laws of the Party to which the data have been transmitted. Irrespective of these limits the data received shall be deleted as soon as they are no longer required for the purpose for which they were transmitted.

5. The personal data subject shall be enabled in accordance with the national legislation of the Parties:

a) to request information regarding the processing of his/her personal data by the competent authorities;

b) to request rectification, erasure or blocking of his/her personal data;

c) to have remedy if his/her request is not complied with.

6. The Parties transmitting personal or other data may impose additional conditions in respect of the processing of the transmitted data. Where additional conditions have been imposed in accordance with this paragraph, the Party to which the data have been transmitted shall process the received data according to those conditions.

Article 21.

Settlement of disputes

Any dispute arising during the application or interpretation of this Treaty shall be settled by negotiations or diplomatic consultation between the Parties.

Article 22.

Entry into force and termination

1. This Treaty is concluded for an indefinite period of time and shall enter into force on the thirtieth (30) day from the date of receiving the last written notification through diplomatic channels in which the Parties notify each other of the completion of the internal legal procedures necessary for the entry into force of the Treaty.

2. This Treaty may be amended with the consent of the Parties. The changes and amendments shall be made in separate protocols that become integral parts of the Treaty and shall enter into force in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article.

3. Either Party may terminate this Treaty at any time by written notification to the other Party through diplomatic channels. Termination shall take effect on expiry of one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of reception of the notification.

4. In case this Treaty is terminated, it shall remain applicable to transfer procedures initiated during the period of its validity, until the completion of such procedures.

5. This Treaty shall also be applicable to the transfer of sentenced persons against whom the judgment was imposed before its entry into force.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized, have signed this Treaty.

DONE in Budapest on 3 June, 2014 in two originals each in Hungarian, Kazakh and English languages, all texts being equally authentic and have the same legal force.

In case of divergence in the interpretation of this Treaty the English text shall prevail. 

 For Hungary

 For the Republic of Kazakhstan

MAGYARORSZÁG ÉS A KAZAH KÖZTÁRSASÁG KÖZÖTT LÉTREJÖTT, AZ ELÍTÉLTEK ÁTSZÁLLÍTÁSÁRÓL SZÓLÓ EGYEZMÉNY

Magyarország és a Kazah Köztársaság (a továbbiakban együttesen: „a Felek”);

Az egymás szuverenitása és egyenjogúsága iránti kölcsönös tisztelet alapján;

A két ország közötti igazságügyi együttműködés megerősítése céljából,

Attól a szándékuktól vezérelve, hogy az elítéltek társadalomba történő visszailleszkedésének elősegítése érdekében saját államukban tölthessék le végrehajtandó büntetésüket;

Az alábbiakban állapodtak meg:

1. Cikk

MEGHATÁROZÁSOK

A jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában:

a) „átszállító Fél” az az állam, amelyből az elítélt átszállítható, vagy átszállításra került;

b) „fogadó Fél” az az állam, amelybe az elítélt átszállítható, vagy átszállításra került;

c) „elítélt” az a személy, akit az átszállító Fél bírósága büntető ügyben hozott ítéletével határozott időtartamú vagy életfogytig tartó szabadságvesztés büntetésre ítélt;

d) „állampolgár” az a személy, aki csak magyar vagy csak kazah állampolgársággal rendelkezik.

2. Cikk

ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

A Felek jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseivel összhangban az elítélteket a kiszabott büntetéseik végrehajtása céljából az átszállító Fél területéről a fogadó Fél területére szállíthatják át.

3. Cikk

KÖZPONTI HATÓSÁGOK

1. A jelen Egyezmény végrehajtása során a Felek által kijelölt központi hatóságok közvetlenül lépnek kapcsolatba egymással.

2. A központi hatóság

Magyarország részéről az igazságügyért felelős miniszter;

a Kazah Köztársaság részéről a Kazah Köztársaság Legfőbb Ügyészsége.

3. A központi hatóságokkal kapcsolatos változásokról a Felek diplomáciai úton értesítik egymást.

4. Cikk

AZ ÁTSZÁLLÍTÁS FELTÉTELEI

1. Az elítélt az alábbi feltételek teljesülése esetén szállítható át:

a) az elítélt a fogadó Fél állampolgára,

b) az ítélet alapjául szolgáló cselekmények a fogadó Fél nemzeti joga szerint is bűncselekményt képeznek,

c) az átszállítás iránti kérelem megérkezésekor az ítélet jogerőre emelkedett, és az elítélt letöltendő szabadságvesztéséből még legalább egy év van hátra,

d) az elítélt, illetve - ha az elítélt kora, fizikai vagy elmeállapota miatt szükséges - jogi képviselője az átszállításhoz írásban hozzájárult és

e) a Felek az átszállításban megegyeznek.

2. Kivételes esetben a Felek akkor is megállapodhatnak az átszállításban, ha az elítélt által letöltendő büntetésből a jelen Cikk 1. bekezdés c) pontjában meghatározott időtartamnál kevesebb van hátra.

5. Cikk

ÁTSZÁLLÍTÁS MEGTAGADÁSI OKOK

1. Az elítélt személy átszállítását meg kell tagadni, ha:

a) bármelyik Fél megítélése szerint az átszállítás sértené a szuverenitását, nemzetbiztonságát, közrendjét, vagy az a saját nemzeti jogrendszerének meghatározó alapelveivel ellentétes, vagy

b) az elítéltet az állambiztonságot veszélyeztető bűncselekmény elkövetése miatt ítélték el, vagy

c) az elítélt személy ellen az átszállító Fél államában bírósági eljárás van folyamatban.

2. A Felek saját belátásuk szerint a jelen Cikk 1. bekezdésében foglalt eseteken kívül más okból is megtagadhatják a másik Fél által kezdeményezett átszállítást.

6. Cikk

ÁTSZÁLLÍTÁSI KÉRELEM ÉS VÁLASZ

1. Az elítélt saját maga vagy jogi képviselője útján jelen Egyezmény szerint bármelyik Félnél kezdeményezheti az átszállítását. Az a Fél, amelyhez a kérelmet intézték, a másik Felet írásban köteles az átszállítási kérelemről tájékoztatni.

2. Átszállítási kérelmet bármelyik Fél előterjeszthet. A megkeresett Fél a lehető legrövidebb időn belül írásban közli a megkereső Féllel döntését arról, hogy az átszállításhoz hozzájárul-e.

3. Az átszállítással kapcsolatos kérelmeket és válaszokat írásban kell megküldeni.

7. Cikk

SZÜKSÉGES OKIRATOK ÉS INFORMÁCIÓK KÖZLÉSE

1. Átszállítási kérelem előterjesztése esetén az átszállító Fél - amennyiben előzetesen egyik Fél sem jelzi, hogy az átszállításhoz nem járul hozzá - az alábbi okiratokat, információkat küldi meg a fogadó Fél számára:

a) az elítélt neve, születési ideje és helye, lakhelye, valamint, amennyiben az rendelkezésre áll, állandó lakcíme;

b) a jogerős ítélet hitelesített példánya, és - amennyiben van ilyen - bármely más kapcsolódó ítélet, valamint az azok alapjául szolgáló jogszabályi rendelkezések;

c) a büntetés már letöltött, valamint még le nem töltött részére vonatkozó adatok, beleértve az előzetes letartóztatás időtartamát, valamint egyéb, a büntetés végrehajtására vonatkozó egyéb lényeges információk;

d) a jelen Egyezmény 4. Cikke 1. bekezdésének d) pontja szerinti írásbeli hozzájárulás az átszállításhoz;

e) az elítélt egészségi állapotára vonatkozó információk;

f) az elítéltnek a büntetés végrehajtása során tanúsított magatartásával kapcsolatos információk.

2. A fogadó Fél a következő okiratokat bocsájtja az átszállító Fél rendelkezésére:

a) okiratok, melyek tanúsítják, hogy az elítélt a fogadó Fél állampolgára;

b) a fogadó Fél azon nemzeti jogszabályi rendelkezései, amelyek tanúsítják, hogy az átszállító Fél bírósága által hozott ítélet alapjául szolgáló cselekmények a fogadó Fél joga szerint is bűncselekménynek minősülnek;

c) az átszállító Fél államában hozott ítélet végrehajtására vonatkozó nemzeti eljárási szabályok a fogadó Fél államában.

8. Cikk

AZ ELÍTÉLT TÁJÉKOZTATÁSA

1. A Felek a saját államukban tartózkodó jelen Egyezmény hatálya alá tartozó elítélteket tájékoztatni kötelesek arról, hogy átszállításukra a jelen Egyezményben foglaltak szerint lehetőség van.

2. A Felek a jelen Egyezmény 6. Cikkében foglaltak szerint írásban tájékoztatják az államaikban tartózkodó elítélteket az átszállító, valamint a fogadó Fél által az átszállítási kérelmek tárgyában hozott döntésekről.

9. Cikk

AZ ELÍTÉLT HOZZÁJÁRULÁSÁNAK ELLENŐRZÉSE

1. Az átszállító Fél biztosítja, hogy a jelen Egyezmény alapján történő átszállításhoz az elítélt, vagy annak jogi képviselője önként és a következmények teljes tudatában adja hozzájárulását, melynek tényét a hozzájáruló nyilatkozatában megerősíti. A hozzájárulás megadására vonatkozó eljárásra az átszállító Fél joga irányadó.

2. A fogadó Fél kérelmére az átszállító Fél engedélyezi, hogy egy, a fogadó Fél által kijelölt hivatalos személy közvetlenül kapcsolatba lépjen az elítélttel abból a célból, hogy ellenőrizze az elítélt által az átszállításához adott hozzájárulás jelen Cikk 1. bekezdésének való megfelelését.

10. Cikk

AZ ELÍTÉLT ÁTADÁSA

Amennyiben a Felek az átszállításról megállapodtak, az átadás időpontját, helyét és lebonyolítását egymással egyeztetve közösen állapítják meg.

11. Cikk

AZ ÍTÉLET VÉGREHAJTÁSA

1. Az elítélt személy átvétele után a fogadó Fél saját nemzeti jogával összhangban az átszállító Fél által kiszabott végrehajtási fokozat és időtartam szerint köteles a büntetés végrehajtását folytatni.

2. Ha az átszállító Fél által kiszabott büntetés végrehajtási fokozata vagy időtartama a fogadó Fél nemzeti jogával nem összeegyeztethető, akkor a fogadó Fél a büntetést a hasonló bűncselekményre belső joga által előírt büntetésre vagy intézkedésre átalakítja. Az átalakítás során:

a) a fogadó Fél kötve van az átszállító Fél államában hozott ítéletben megállapított tényálláshoz;

b) a fogadó Fél a szabadságvesztéssel járó büntetést vagy intézkedést nem alakíthatja pénzbüntetéssé;

c) a fogadó Fél által átalakított büntetés természete és tartama a lehető legteljesebb mértékben megegyezik az átszállító Fél államában kiszabott büntetéssel;

d) az átalakított büntetés nemét és tartamát illetően nem lehet súlyosabb az átszállító Fél által kiszabott büntetésnél, és nem haladhatja meg a fogadó Fél joga szerint a hasonló bűncselekmény kategóriára előírt maximálisan kiszabható büntetési időtartamot;

e) a büntetés átalakítása során a fogadó Felet nem köti a nemzeti joga szerint hasonló bűncselekmény kategóriára előírt minimális büntetési időtartam;

f) az elítélt által az átszállító Fél államában töltött fogva tartás időtartama az átszállító Fél államában még letöltendő büntetés időtartamából levonásra kerül.

3. A jelen Cikk 2. bekezdésében foglalt átalakítás megtörténte után a fogadó Fél az átszállító Fél részére haladéktalanul megküldi az átalakításról szóló okirat egy másolati példányát.

4. A fogadó Fél saját nemzeti jogával összhangban jogosult a büntetés időtartamát csökkenteni vagy feltételes szabadságról rendelkezni.

12. Cikk

JOGHATÓSÁG FENNTARTÁSA

1. Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában az ászállító Fél fenntartja joghatóságát a saját bíróságai által hozott ítéletek felülvizsgálatára.

2. Amennyiben a fogadó Félnek a jelen Cikk 1. bekezdése szerint felülvizsgált ítéletet küld meg az átszállító Fél, úgy a Fogadó Fél a felülvizsgált ítéletet köteles a saját nemzeti jogával összhangban végrehajtani.

13. Cikk

EGYÉNI VAGY KÖZKEGYELEM IRÁNTI KÉRELEM

Bármely Fél saját nemzeti joga szerint jogosult egyéni vagy közkegyelmet biztosítani az elítélt személy részére, és köteles az ilyen döntésről a másik Felet haladéktalanul tájékoztatni.

14. Cikk

TÁJÉKOZTATÁS AZ ÁTVETT ÍTÉLET VÉGREHAJTÁSÁRÓL

A fogadó Fél köteles az átszállító Felet a büntetés végrehajtásáról tájékoztatni, amennyiben,

a) a büntetés végrehajtása befejeződött;

b) az elítélt személy megszökött vagy elhunyt a büntetésének kitöltését megelőzően;

c) az átszállító Fél arról külön tájékoztatást kér.

15. Cikk

ÁTMENŐ SZÁLLÍTÁS

1. A Felek nemzeti jogukkal összhangban engedélyezhetik harmadik állam által a másik Fél számára büntetés végrehajtás átadása céljából átszállításra kerülő elítélt személyek saját területükön történő átmenő szállítását.

2. Az átvevő Fél által a másik Félhez címzett kérelemnek tartalmaznia kell az átszállítani kívánt személy leírását, állampolgárságát, valamint az ügy tényállásának rövid összefoglalását. A kérelmet és a kiegészítő információkat a központi hatóságoknak kell megküldeni, illetve különösen sürgős ügyekben a Nemzetközi Bűnügyi Rendőrség Szervezetéhez (Interpol) kell eljuttatni. Az elítélt személy átszállításáról szóló megállapodást tanúsító okirat másolata a tranzitkérelem mellékleteként csatolandó.

3. A tranzit állam saját területén őrizetben tartja az átszállítani kívánt személyt.

4. Az átmenő szállítás engedélyezése nem szükséges, ha az átszállítás légi úton történik és az érintett Fél területén nincs tervezett leszállás. Ha nem tervezett leszállás történik a tranzit Állam területén, az átmenő szállítást kérő Állam haladéktalanul értesíti az átmenő szállítással érintett Felet. Az érintett Fél legfeljebb tizenöt (15) napra őrizetbe veszi a kért személyt a jelen Cikk 2. bekezdés szerinti kérelem megérkezéséig.

16. Cikk

NYELVHASZNÁLAT

Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában a Felek saját hivatalos nyelvüket használják, és egymáshoz címzett közléseiket kötelesek a másik Fél hivatalos nyelvére vagy angol nyelvre lefordítani.

17. Cikk

AZ OKIRATOK HITELESSÉGE

Jelen Egyezmény alkalmazásában a Felek központi hatóságának aláírásával és hivatalos pecsétjével ellátott dokumentumok hitelességét a másik Fél hatóságai további hitelesítési eljárás lefolytatása nélkül kötelesek elfogadni.

18. Cikk

KÖLTSÉGEK

1. A fogadó Fél köteles viselni

a) az elítélt átszállításával járó valamennyi költséget, kivéve azon tételeket, melyek kizárólag az átszállító Fél területén merültek fel;

b) a büntetés átszállítást követő végrehajtásának költségeit.

2. A tranzit átszállásokkal kapcsolatban felmerülő költségek a tranzit engedélyt kérő Felet terhelik.

19. Cikk

NEMZETKÖZI EGYEZMÉNYEKHEZ VALÓ VISZONY

A jelen Egyezmény nem érinti a Felek más nemzetközi egyezmények alapján fennálló jogait és kötelezettségeit.

20. Cikk

SZEMÉLYES ADATOK VÉDELME

1. Amennyiben a jelen Egyezmény alapján az elítélt személyek átszállítása céljából szükséges és arányos, a jelen Cikk 2. bekezdésének sérelme nélkül, a Felek továbbíthatnak egymásnak személyes adatokat, és a Fél, amelynek az adatokat továbbították, kezelheti ezeket.

2. A fent említett adatok bármilyen egyéb célból kezelhetőek, amennyiben ahhoz előzetesen az adatot továbbító Fél, vagy az érintett személy hozzájárult. A hozzájárulást az adatot továbbító Fél nemzeti joga szerint kell megadni.

3. A jelen Egyezmény rendelkezéseinek végrehajtása során személyes adatokat továbbító Fél kötelezheti az adatot fogadó Felet, hogy az ilyen adatok kezeléséről adjon tájékoztatást.

4. A jelen Cikk 6. bekezdésének sérelme nélkül, a jelen Egyezmény alapján továbbított adatokat annak a Félnek a nemzeti joga szerint kell kezelni és törölni, amelynek az adatokat továbbították. A fenti korlátozásoktól függetlenül az adatokat törölni kell, amint továbbításuk célja érdekében kezelésük szükségtelenné válik.

5. Az érintett személy jogosult arra, hogy a Felek nemzeti jogszabályaival összhangban

a) tájékoztatást kérjen személyes adatainak kezeléséről;

b) kérelmezze személyes adatainak helyesbítését, törlését vagy zárolását;

c) jogorvoslattal éljen, ha kérelmét nem teljesítik.

6. A személyes vagy más adatokat továbbító Felek további feltételeket szabhatnak meg a továbbított adatok kezelésére vonatkozóan. Amennyiben, a jelen bekezdés alapján további feltételeket állapítottak meg, a Fél, amelynek az adatokat továbbították, köteles ezen feltételek szerint kezelni a továbbított adatokat.

21. Cikk

VITÁK RENDEZÉSE

A jelen Egyezmény értelmezésével vagy végrehajtásával kapcsolatosan felmerülő bármilyen vitát tárgyalások vagy diplomáciai konzultáció útján kell rendezni.

22. Cikk

AZ EGYEZMÉNY HATÁLYBALÉPÉSE ÉS FELBONTÁSA

1. Jelen Egyezményt a Felek határozatlan időre kötik. A jelen Egyezmény a diplomáciai úton érkezett azon utolsó írásbeli értesítés kézhezvételétől számított harmincadik (30.) napon lép hatályba, amelyben a Felek a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépéséhez szükséges belső jogi eljárások lezárulásáról értesítik egymást.

2. Jelen Egyezményt a Felek közös megegyezéssel módosíthatják. A változtatásokat és módosításokat külön jegyzőkönyvbe kell foglalni, mely a jelen Egyezmény szerves részévé válik és a jelen Cikk 1. bekezdése szerint lép hatályba.

3. A jelen Egyezményt a Felek a másik Fél részére diplomáciai úton megküldött írásbeli felmondással bármikor felbonthatják. A felmondás a kézhezvétel napjától számított száznyolcvan (180) nap elteltével lép hatályba.

4. A jelen Egyezmény - a felmondás ellenére - az eljárás befejezéséig alkalmazandó marad azokra az átszállítási eljárásokra nézve, amelyek a hatálya alatt indultak.

5. A jelen Egyezményt azon elítéltek átszállítására is alkalmazni kell, akikre a jelen Egyezmény hatálybalépését megelőzően szabtak ki ítéletet.

FENTIEK HITELÉÜL, a saját nemzeti joguk szerint kellően meghatalmazott alulírottak aláírják a jelen Egyezményt.

KÉSZÜLT Budapesten, 2014. év június hó 3. napján, két eredeti példányban magyar, kazah és angol nyelven, amelyek mindegyike egyaránt hiteles és hatályos. Eltérő értelmezés esetén az angol szöveg az irányadó. 

 MAGYARORSZÁG RÉSZÉRŐL

 A KAZAH KÖZTÁRSASÁG RÉSZÉRŐL”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és a 3. § az Egyezmény 22. cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) Az Egyezmény, illetve a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter - annak ismertté válását követően - a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) Az e törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről az igazságügyért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.