2014. évi LVIII. törvény

a Magyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya között a nemzetközi közúti személyszállításról és árufuvarozásról szóló Egyezmény kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya között a nemzetközi közúti személyszállításról és árufuvarozásról szóló Egyezmény (a továbbiakban: Egyezmény) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés az Egyezményt e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § Az Egyezmény hiteles angol nyelvű és magyar nyelvű szövege a következő:

„AGREEMENTbetween the Government of Hungary and the Government the Republic of Serbia on road passenger and goods transport

The Government of Hungary and the Government of the Republic of Serbia (hereinafter referred to as the Contracting Parties),

Desirous to regulate and develop the road passenger and goods transport between their states and in transit through their territories on terms of reciprocity and in the spirit of cooperation and mutual benefit,

Have agreed on the following:

I. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

Article 1

(1) The provisions of this Agreement are referring to the road passenger and goods transport between the States of the Contracting Parties, the passenger and goods transport in transit through the territories of the States of the Contracting Parties as well as the goods transport from and to a third state, that are operated by buses or lorries registered on the territory of the State of either Contracting Party.

(2) This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Contracting Parties deriving from other international agreements. This Agreement shall not affect the obligations of Hungary and the Republic of Serbia towards the European Union, including the obligations from the primary and secondary law of the European Union in respect of Hungary.

Article 2

For the purposes of this Agreement, individual terms have the following meaning:

1. „Transport Operator”

means any natural or legal person (i.e. business association without status of legal person) in Hungary i.e. any subject in the Republic of Serbia, which is authorized, according to the national legislation of Hungary i.e., the Republic of Serbia to transport passengers or goods by road for own account or for remuneration;

2. „Bus”

means a motor vehicle with mechanical propulsion for the carriage of passengers, which is according to certain technical conditions suitable for transport of more than nine passengers, including the driver, and the trailer for transport of luggage;

3. „Motor vehicle”

means a motor vehicle with mechanical propulsion for the carriage of goods, which is according to certain technical conditions suitable for transport of goods, including each accompanying trailer or semi-trailer;

4. „Tannsport from or to a third State”

means the carriage performed by an operator established in the State of a Contracting Party from the territory of a third State in which this operator is not established into the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party as well as the carriage from the territory of the State of a Contracting Party, which is performed by an operator established in the State of the other Contracting Party into the territory of a third State in which this operator is not established;

5. „Cabotage”

means the transport of passengers or goods between two places on the territory of the State of a Contracting Party by bus or by motor vehicle registered on the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party;

6. „Transit”

6.1 means the passenger transport which is operated through the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party without picking up and setting down passengers on the route;

6.2 the goods transport by motor vehicle, which is operated through the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party without loading and unloading goods;

7. „Regular passenger service”

means the passenger transport by bus over a specified route with a specified frequency, according to specified timetable and fares, whereby passenger are picked up and set down only at predetermined stopping points;

8. „Special regular passenger service”

means regular bus transport of organized passenger group defined by the travel objective, with exclusion of other passengers;

9. „Occasional passenger service”

means bus transport of passengers falling neither within the definition of a regular passenger service nor within the definition of a special regular passenger service;

10. „Goods transport in border area”

means goods transport whereby the road length from loading place or unloading place to the Hungarian-Serbian border crossing point does not exceed 50 kilometers (i.e. 100 kilometers within return journey);

11. „Competent Ministry”

in Hungary is the Ministry led by the Minister in charge of transport and in the Republic of Serbia is the Ministry in charge of transport.

II. PASSENGER TRANSPORT

Article 3

(1) For the operation of the regular passenger service a permit is necessary.

(2) The permits for the operation of the regular passenger service between the States of the Contracting Parties are issued by the competent authorities of the States, each for the section on its territory. The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties in line with the relevant national legislation, jointly define the validity period of permits and cooperate in the approval of timetable, fares and itinerary sketch.

(3) Application for the issuing of permit referred to in paragraph 2 is submitted through the competent authority of the Contracting Party in which the operator is located to the competent authority of the other Contracting Party.

(4) Application referred to in paragraph 3 must comprise the following data:

(4.1) Name and surname, i.e. name and address of the operator;

(4.2) Kind of transport;

(4.3) Permit validity period;

(4.4) Period of operating transport and projected frequency;

(4.5) Itinerary sketch with stopping places (bus stations for getting on and off of passengers, rest places for drivers, border crossing points);

(4.6) Route length in km at the outward journey and the return journey;

(4.7) Distance covered in a day;

(4.8) Driving and rest times of drivers;

(4.9) Timetable;

(4.10) Pricelist (fares tables) and travelling conditions.

(5) The permit for operating regular passenger service in transit through the territory of the State of a Contracting Party is issued by the competent authority of the Contracting Party through whose state territory the transit is operated.

(6) With the application for issuing a permit for the operation of the regular passenger service in transit have to be enclosed data from paragraph 4 included in subparagraph 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.5. and 4.9. from the present Article and permit copies of the countries between which the service is operated.

Article 4

(1) For operating the occasional service no permit is necessary in the following cases:

(1.1) In transit,

(1.2) Between the territories of the States of the Contracting Parties, namely:

(1.2.1) closed - door tours, i.e. the transport performed with the same bus which carries the same group of passengers throughout the whole journey and brings them back to the place of departure that is located on the territory of the State of a Contracting Party where the bus is registered and the composition of the passenger group is unchanged during the journey;

(1.2.2) Transport of the same group of passengers from a place of departure which is located on the territory of the State of the Contracting Party where the bus is registered to a place of destination which is located on the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party and the return journey of unladen bus to the place of departure.

(2) For operating journey of a bus which replaces the broken down bus that performed one kind of transport referred to in paragraph 1 no permit is necessary.

(3) For operating of occasional services referred to in paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 it is necessary to make a waybill for each journey which during the journey must be continuously kept on the bus and which is on entering the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party has to be certified by the customs officers except when entering the territory of Hungary from the territory of another EU member State.

(4) For the operation of other occasional services the permit of the competent authority of a Contracting Party is necessary. Operator’s application for issuing the permit is submitted through the competent authority of a Contracting Party where the operator is located, to the competent authority of the other Contracting Party, which resolves the application at earliest convenience.

Article 5

(1) For operating special regular passenger service a permit is needed. The permits are issued by the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties, each authority for the bus line section on its own territory.

(2) Application for issuing the permit for special regular passenger service is submitted through the competent authority of a Contracting Party where the operator is located to the competent authority of the other Contracting Party. The application must be submitted within at least 60 days before the beginning of transport performance.

(3) Application for issuing the permit for special regular passenger service must have the data referred to in subparagraphs 4.1)-4.9) in paragraph 4 of Article 3 (of this Agreement).

(4) When operating special regular passenger service the operator is obliged to draw up the waybill which must be kept continually on the bus and on entering the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party has to be certified by the customs officers except when entering the territory of Hungary from the territory of another EU member State.

III. GOODS TRANSPORT

Article 6

(1) The following activities may be carried out in possession of a permit issued previously by the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties:

- transport of goods between the territories of the States of the Contracting Parties, by a motor vehicle registered in the territory of the States of the either Contracting Party, including transport of goods within the border area,

- transport of transit goods by a transport operator established in Hungary through the territory of the Republic of Serbia to a third state that is not member of the EU or from a non-EU member state,

- transport of transit goods by a transport operator established in the Republic of Serbia from the Republic of Serbia through the territory of Hungary to an EU Member State or from an EU Member State to a destination in the Republic of Serbia,

- transport of goods from or to a third State according to point 4 in Article 2.

(2) A permit copy is issued for every motor vehicle. The permit is issued for an outward journey and a return journey, for laden or unladen vehicle. For transport of goods by a motor vehicle with trailer, the permit is necessary only for the motor vehicle.

(3) The permit referred to in paragraph 1 and paragraph 2 can be granted:

(3.1) With payment of vehicle tax on the territory of Hungary or with payment of road charge on the territory of the Republic of Serbia;

(3.2) Without payment of duties referred to in subparagraph 3.1) of this paragraph.

(4) The Competent Ministries of the Contracting Parties within the Joint Committee referred to in Article 16 lay down kind, number, conditions for issuance and use of permits referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3.

(5) The permit for transport of goods is non-transferable i.e. may be used only for the motor vehicle and for the transport activity to which it has been issued and by the operator to whom it has been issued.

(6) The permit referred to in paragraph 1 must be kept in the vehicle while transporting goods on the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party and performed, during inspection, at the request of the competent authority of the other Contracting Party.

(7) The permits are valid for the calendar year and may be used inclusive of 31st January of the next year.

Article 7

Transport of goods can be carried out without permit in the following cases:

1) Transport of advertising and training material (e.g. for purposes of exhibitions or fairs);

2) Transport of equipment, accessories and animals for theatrical, musical, film and circus performances, and those intended for radio recordings, or for film or television production;

3) Return journey of vehicles that are damaged or have broken down;

4) Transport of cemetery urns and coffins with dead bodies;

5) Transport of humanitarian aid;

6) Transport of livestock;

7) Transport of removing furniture;

8) Transport of mail matters;

9) Transport of pieces of work of art;

10) Transport of luggage in trailer of bus carrying the passengers;

11) Goods transport by motor vehicles whose total permissible laden weight, including trailers, does not exceed 6 tonnes, or when the permitted payload, including trailer, does not exceed 3.5 tonnes;

12) First unladen run in transit of a vehicle bought abroad for the operator of either State of the Contracting Parties.

Article 8

(1) The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties ensure in the case of the motor vehicles which are granted with a permit for transport of goods on the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party that no measures/regulations are applied which count as more unfavourable than those applied in the case of the motor vehicles registered in the own State regarding the upper limits of permissible dimensions and weight.

(2) In the cases when the dimensions and weight of motor vehicle or its load exceed the upper limit allowed on the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party where transport is being operated, it is necessary to get a special permit which is issued by the competent authority of that Contracting Party.

(3) The permit referred to in paragraph 2 may prescribe relevant limits or determine route and the border-crossing-point to use.

IV. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 9

(1) While operating transport of passengers and goods on the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party the operator is obliged to observe the national legislation of that State.

(2) In case an operator established on the territory of the State of either Contracting Party violates any provisions of this Agreement or national regulations in the field of road transport of the State of the other Contracting Party, the competent authority on whose territory the violation was committed, apart from carrying through its own proceedings, informs the competent authority of the Contracting Party where the operator is established, which takes measures in accordance with its national legislation.

(3) The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties notify each other of undertaken measures referred to in paragraph 2.

Article 10

(1) On entering the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party the operator is obliged, to perform a third part insurance document at the request of the competent authority of that Contracting Party.

(2) If the operator does not have the document referred to in paragraph 1 on entering the territory of the State of the other Contracting Party, the operator is obliged in accordance with national regulations to conclude self-insurance contract.

Article 11

(1) The following vehicles are exempted from payment of road charge on the territory of the Republic of Serbia or from payment of vehicle tax on the territory of Hungary:

(1.1) Motor vehicles that operate goods transport on the basis of the permit quota defined in paragraph (4) of Article 6 with the exception of the motor vehicles referred to in subparagraph (3.1.) of paragraph 3 of Article 6,

(1.2) Motor vehicles that operate goods transport referred to in Article 7 and unladen run by a vehicle in the cases of transport referred to in subparagraphs 1.1)-1.11) of paragraph 1 of Article 7,

(1.3) Buses that operate passenger transport between the territories of the States of the Contracting Parties or in transit through the territory of the State of either Contracting Party.

(2) The provision of paragraph 1 of this Article do not relate to charges, road tolls and bridge tolls which are to pay on certain highway sections, for driving through certain city areas, tunnels, over bridges and other road constructions as well as to charges for transport in case of exceeding dimensions, total permissible weight and/or axle load lied down under the national legislation of the States of the Contracting Parties.

Article 12

(1) On entering the territory of the Republic of Serbia, the operator is exempted from import duties and fees for:

(1.1) Fuel contained in fixed tanks that are factory-designed and installed by the manufacturer for this model of vehicle, serving for vehicle drive, for a vehicle and a journey;

(1.2) Spare parts and tools that are temporarily imported into the territory of the Republic of Serbia on the basis of the document issued or certified by the competent customs office, for repair of the damaged or broken down vehicle which operates transport under this Agreement.

(2) Tools and unused and replaced parts referred to in subparagraph 1.2) of paragraph 1 must be returned to the State in which the vehicle is registered or be destroyed under supervision of customs authority or they are to be handled pursuant to the customs regulations valid on the territory of the Republic of Serbia.

(3) When entering the territory of Hungary in accordance with paragraph (2) of Article 1, in regard to the road transport of passengers and goods that the provisions of this Agreement relate to, Hungary provides opportunities and allowances based on current customs regulations of the European Union according to procedures and rules laid down there in regard to duties and fees of identical effects as well as exemption from import and export limitations and prohibitions. With respect to that when entering the territory of Hungary, the operator is exempted from duties and fees of identical effects for:

(3.1) fuel contained in fixed tanks that are designed and installed by the manufacturer for all motor vehicles or buses of the same type, serving the purpose of propulsion of the vehicle or bus as it is laid down in Chapter XXVIII of Council Regulation (EC) No. 1186/2009 setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty and any amendments thereto,

(3.2) spare parts and tools that are temporarily imported into the territory of Hungary on the basis of the document certified by the customs office of entry and with simultaneous completion of the relevant customs formalities, necessary for the repair of the vehicle damaged or broken down during the journey which operates international transport under this Agreement,

(4) spare parts and tools that are temporarily imported into the territory of Hungary for repair of the damaged or broken down Serbian motor vehicle or bus which operates transport under this Agreement on the territory of Hungary are assigned a customs-approved treatment or use.

Article 13

Cabotage is prohibited, except for special authorization of the competent authority of the Contracting Party of the State on whose territory the cabotage is carried out.

Article 14

Concerning the customs control and control carried out by border inspection services, as well as supervision of compliance with veterinary, phytosanitary, epidemic, environment and natural conservation rules, the Contracting Parties apply national regulations or provisions of international agreements signed by the Contracting Parties.

Article 15

The competent border traffic control bodies and other bodies carrying out other official controls at the state borders shall carry out, in case of transport of severely injured persons, in case of regular passenger transport, as well as in case of motor vehicles transporting livestock, highly perishable or dangerous goods, the border-, customs-, veterinary and phytosanitary, epidemiologic and environmental protection controls out of turn.

Article 16

(1) For the purpose of implementation and application of this Agreement the Contracting Parties shall set up a Joint Committee that shall meet at least once a year or extraordinarily at the request of a Competent Ministry, alternately on the territory of the State of either Contracting Party.

(2) In case of need, the Joint Committee shall propose harmonizing of this Agreement with traffic development and multilateral agreements signed by both Contracting Parties, i.e. their States.

(3) The Joint Committee will go on examining the possibilities of the further facilitation of goods transport and will elaborate the respective proposals for the Contracting Parties.

Article 17

(1) This Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day (30) after the date of receipt of the last note with which the Contracting Parties notify each other of having accomplished ratification procedure to this Agreement in accordance with the national legislations.

(2) This Agreement has been concluded for an indefinite period and may be cancelled by each Contracting Party in diplomatic way. In case of cancellation, this Agreement shall become invalid six (6) months after the receipt of cancellation notification.

(3) On entering into force of this Agreement, the following agreements shall become void in the relations between Hungary and the Republic of Serbia:

(3.1) Agreement between the Government of the People’s Republic of Hungary and the Government of the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia on regulation of road goods transport by lorries as well as on customs clearance procedure concerning this transport, signed in Budapest on 9th February 1962.

(3.2) Agreement between the Government of the People’s Republic of Hungary and the Federal Executive Council of the Assembly of the Socialistic Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on modifications and supplements of the Agreement between the Government of Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia and the Government of the People ’s Republic of Hungary on regulation of road goods transport by lorries as well as on customs clearance procedure concerning this transport signed in Szeged on 24th June 1982 and

(3.3) Agreement between the Government of the People’s Republic of Hungary and the Government of the Socialistic Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on international passenger transport by buses signed on 16th January 1965 in Belgrade.

Done in Belgrade on 1 July 2014 in two original copies in the Hungarian, Serbian and English languages, all the texts being equally authentic. In case of dispute, the English text shall prevail.

 For the Government of Hungary

 For the Government of the Republic of Serbia

EGYEZMÉNYMagyarország Kormánya és a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya között a nemzetközi közúti személyszállításról és árufuvarozásról

Magyarország Kormánya, valamint a Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya (a továbbiakban: Szerződő Felek),

azzal az óhajjal, hogy a viszonosság, az együttműködés és a kölcsönös előnyök alapján szabályozzák és fejlesszék az államaik közötti, valamint a területükön áthaladó nemzetközi közúti személyszállítást és árufuvarozást,

a következőkben állapodnak meg:

I. BEVEZETŐ RENDELKEZÉSEK

1. Cikk

(1) Ezen Egyezménnyel a Szerződő Felek az államaik közötti és az államaik területén tranzitforgalomban áthaladó, továbbá a harmadik államba irányuló, vagy harmadik államból kiinduló, az egyik Szerződő Fél államának területén bejegyzett autóbusszal végzett nemzetközi közúti személyszállítást, illetve az egyik Szerződő Fél államának területén bejegyzett gépjárművel végzett nemzetközi közúti árufuvarozást szabályozzák.

(2) Ezen Egyezmény nem érinti a Szerződő Felek más nemzetközi megállapodásokból származó jogait és kötelezettségeit. Ezen Egyezmény nem befolyásolja Magyarországnak és a Szerb Köztársaságnak az Európai Unió irányába vállalt kötelezettségeit, beleértve Magyarország tekintetében az Európai Unió elsődleges és másodlagos jogából származó kötelezettségeket.

2. Cikk

Az ezen Egyezményben szereplő kifejezések jelentése a következő:

1. fuvarozó:

Magyarország területén az a természetes vagy jogi személy, illetve jogi személyiséggel nem rendelkező gazdasági társaság, illetve a Szerb Köztársaság területén bármely jogalany, aki/amely Magyarország, illetve a Szerb Köztársaság nemzeti jogszabályai alapján díj ellenében vagy saját számlára nemzetközi közúti személyszállítás, illetve árufuvarozás végzésére jogosult;

2. autóbusz:

személyszállításra szolgáló, gépi meghajtású közúti jármű, amely az adott műszaki követelmények alapján, a vezetőt is beleértve kilencnél több utas szállítására alkalmas, valamint az általa vontatott, személyi poggyász fuvarozására szolgáló pótkocsi;

3. gépjármű:

árufuvarozásra szolgáló, gépi meghajtású közúti jármű, amely az adott műszaki követelmények alapján árufuvarozásra alkalmas beleértve bármely ahhoz kapcsolt pótkocsit vagy félpótkocsit;

4. harmadik államból történő, vagy harmadik államba irányuló fuvarozás:

olyan tevékenység, melynek során az egyik Szerződő Fél államának fuvarozója a másik Szerződő Fél államának területére végez fuvarozást olyan állam területéről, amely nem a székhelye az említett fuvarozónak, vagy az egyik Szerződő Fél államának területéről a másik Szerződő Fél államának fuvarozója olyan harmadik állam területére végez szállítást, amely nem a székhelye ezen fuvarozónak;

5. kabotázs:

olyan személyszállítás vagy árufuvarozás, amelyet az egyik Szerződő Fél államának területén bejegyzett autóbusszal vagy gépjárművel végeznek a másik Szerződő Fél államának területén lévő két pont között;

6. tranzit:

(6.1) autóbusszal történő személyszállítás, amely a másik Szerződő Fél államának területén keresztül, utasok fel- és leszállása nélkül történik,

(6.2) gépjárművel történő árufuvarozás, amely a másik Szerződő Fél államának területén keresztül, áruk be- és kirakása nélkül történik;

7. menetrend szerinti személyszállítás:

meghatározott gyakorisággal, meghatározott útvonalon, előre meghatározott menetrend és díjszabás alapján autóbusszal történő személyszállítás, amelynek során utasok csak előre meghatározott megállási pontokon szállhatnak fel, illetve le;

8. különcélú menetrend szerinti személyszállítás:

az utazás célja alapján meghatározott utaskör menetrend alapján autóbusszal történő szállítása más utasok kizárásával;

9. nem menetrend szerinti személyszállítás:

minden olyan autóbusszal történő személyszállítás, ami nem tartozik a menetrend szerinti személyszállítás, illetve a különcélú menetrend szerinti személyszállítás kategóriájába;

10. határmenti övezetben végzett árufuvarozás:

olyan árufuvarozás, amelynél a felrakás vagy a lerakás helyétől a szerb-magyar határátkelőhelyig az út hossza nem haladja meg az 50 km-t (illetve oda-vissza út esetén a 100 km-t);

11. illetékes minisztérium:

Magyarországon a közlekedésért felelős miniszter által vezetett minisztérium, a Szerb Köztársaságban a közlekedésért felelős minisztérium.

II. SZEMÉLYSZÁLLÍTÁS

3. Cikk

(1) A menetrend szerinti személyszállításhoz engedély szükséges.

(2) A Szerződő Felek állama közötti menetrend szerinti személyszállításra vonatkozó engedélyeket a Szerződő Felek államának illetékes hatóságai adják ki, mindegyik az útvonalnak a saját állama területére eső részére. A Szerződő Felek államának illetékes hatóságai - a vonatkozó nemzeti jogszabályaikkal összhangban - közösen határozzák meg az engedély érvényességének időtartamát és együttműködnek a menetrend, az útvonal továbbá az alkalmazandó díjszabások jóváhagyásának tekintetében.

(3) A (2) bekezdésében említett engedély iránti kérelmet azon Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatósága útján kell benyújtani a másik Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatóságához, amelynek területén a fuvarozó székhelye van.

(4) A (3) bekezdés szerinti kérelmeknek az alábbi adatokat kell tartalmazniuk:

(4.1) A kérelmező fuvarozó családi és utónevét, illetve nevét és székhelyét,

(4.2) A fuvarozás fajtáját,

(4.3) Az engedély időtartamát,

(4.4) A járat tervezett gyakoriságát és időtartamát,

(4.5) A pontos útvonalat, a megállóhelyeket (megállóhelyek az utasok fel- és leszállása céljából, pihenőhelyek, határátkelőhelyek),

(4.6) Az útvonal hosszát kilométerben: odaútban és visszaútban,

(4.7) Az egy nap alatt megtett távolságot,

(4.8) A gépkocsivezetők vezetési és pihenőidejét,

(4.9) A menetrendet,

(4.10) A személyszállítási díjakat (díjtáblázatokat) és az utazási feltételeket.

(5) A menetrend szerinti, a Szerződő Fél államának területén tranzitforgalomban áthaladó személyszállításra vonatkozó engedélyeket azon Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatósága adja ki, amely államának területén keresztül a tranzitszállítás történik.

(6) A menetrend szerinti, tranzitforgalomban áthaladó személyszállítási engedélykérelemnek a (4) bekezdés (4.1), (4.2), (4.3), (4.5) és (4.9) pontokba foglalt adatokat kell tartalmazni, valamint azon államok engedélyeinek másolatait, amelyek területe között a szállítás történik.

4. Cikk

(1) A nem menetrend szerinti személyszállítás engedélymentes az alábbi esetekben:

(1.1) tranzit céljából történő áthaladás,

(1.2) a Szerződő Felek államainak területe közötti

(1.2.1) zártajtós körjáratok, vagyis olyan személyszállítás, amelynek során ugyanazon autóbusz szállítja az utasok ugyanazon csoportját az autóbuszt bejegyző állam területén lévő kiindulási pontról az ugyancsak ott található végpontra, és az utazás során az utasok személyi összetétele nem változik,

(1.2.2) olyan személyszállítás, amelynek során az utasok változatlan személyi összetételű csoportját az autóbuszt bejegyző államból a másik Szerződő Fél államába szállítják és az autóbusz üresen tér vissza.

(2) Nincs szükség engedélyre olyan autóbusz esetében, amely az (1) bekezdés szerinti személyszállítások egyikét végző meghibásodott autóbusz kicserélésére szolgál.

(3) Az (1)-(2) bekezdésben említett nem menetrend szerinti járatok esetében minden alkalommal menetlevélre van szükség, amelyet folyamatosan az autóbuszon kell tartani, és amelyet a másik Szerződő Fél államának területére - kivéve a Magyarország területére az Európai Unió valamely más tagállamának területéről - való belépéskor annak vámhatósága lepecsétel.

(4) Az egyéb nem menetrend szerinti személyszállításhoz a Szerződő Felek állama illetékes hatóságainak engedélye szükséges. Az ilyen engedélyek kiadásáért a fuvarozó kérelmet nyújt be azon Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága útján, amelynek területén a fuvarozó székhelye van a másik Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatóságához, amely a kérelem ügyében soron kívül jár el.

5. Cikk

(1) A különcélú menetrend szerinti személyszállításhoz engedély szükséges. Az engedélyt a Szerződő Felek államának illetékes hatóságai adják ki, mindegyik az útvonalnak a saját állama területére eső részére.

(2) A különcélú menetrend szerinti személyszállításhoz az engedélyezés iránti kérelmeket azon Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatósága útján kell a másik Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatóságához benyújtani, amelynek területén a kérelmező fuvarozó székhelye van. A kérelmeket legalább 60 nappal a járat beindítása előtt kell benyújtani.

(3) A különcélú menetrend szerinti személyszállítás engedélyezés iránti kérelemnek az ezen Egyezmény 3. Cikke (4) bekezdése (4.1)-(4.9) pontjaiban foglalt adatokat kell tartalmaznia.

(4) Különcélú menetrend szerinti személyszállítás esetén a fuvarozónak menetlevelet kell készítenie, amelyet folyamatosan az autóbuszon kell tartani, és amelyet a másik Szerződő Fél államának területére való belépéskor annak vámhatósága lepecsétel (a Magyarország területére az Európai Unió valamely más tagállamának területéről való belépések kivételével).

III. ÁRUFUVAROZÁS

6. Cikk

(1) A Szerződő Felek államának illetékes hatóságai által előzetesen kiadott engedéllyel végezhető:

- az egyik Szerződő Fél államának területén nyilvántartott gépjárművel a Szerződő Felek államának területe között végzett árufuvarozás, beleértve a határmenti övezetben végzett árufuvarozást is,

- tranzitáruknak Magyarországon letelepedett fuvarozó által a Szerb Köztársaság területén keresztül harmadik, nem EU-tagállamba vagy nem EU-tagállamból történő fuvarozása,

- tranzitáruknak a Szerb Köztársaságban letelepedett fuvarozó által történő fuvarozása a Szerb Köztársaságból Magyarország területén keresztül EU-tagállamba, illetve EU-tagállamból szerbiai rendeltetési helyre történő fuvarozása,

- a 2. Cikk 4. pontja szerinti harmadik államból történő vagy harmadik államba irányuló fuvarozások.

(2) Minden gépjármű részére külön engedélyt kell kiadni. Az engedély egyszeri oda- és visszaútra jogosít és üres vagy rakott gépjárműre egyaránt vonatkozik. Járműszerelvénnyel történő fuvarozás esetében az engedélyt csak a vontatóra kell kiadni.

(3) Az (1) és (2) bekezdésében említett engedély biztosítható:

(3.1) Magyarország területén gépjárműadó-, illetve a Szerb Köztársaság területén útdíj köteles módon, vagy

(3.2) e bekezdés (3.1) pontjában említett fizetések alól mentes módon.

(4) Az illetékes minisztériumok jelen Egyezmény 16. Cikke szerinti Vegyesbizottság keretében rögzítik az (1)-(3) bekezdésében meghatározott engedélyek típusát, számát, illetve kiadásuk és használatuk rendjét.

(5) A közúti fuvarozási engedély nem ruházható át, tehát csak arra a gépjárműre valamint fuvarfeladatra használható fel, amelyre kiadták és az a fuvarozó használhatja fel, akinek a részére kiadták.

(6) Az (1) bekezdésben említett engedélyeket a másik Szerződő Fél államának területén végzett fuvarozás során a gépjárművön kell tartani, és azokat ellenőrzés során a másik Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága felszólítására fel kell mutatni.

(7) A tárgyévre kiadott engedélyek az azt követő év január hó 31. napjáig érvényesek.

7. Cikk

Engedélymentesen végezhető:

1. a reklám vagy oktatás céljait szolgáló (pl. vásáron vagy kiállításon bemutatásra kerülő) tárgyak fuvarozása,

2. színházi, zenei, film-, sport- és cirkuszi rendezvények, bemutatók vagy rádió-, film-, televíziós felvételek célját szolgáló berendezések és tartozékaik, illetve a produkciókhoz tartozó állatok fuvarozása,

3. sérült, illetve javítást igénylő gépjárművek visszafuvarozása,

4. elhunytak földi maradványait tartalmazó urnák, koporsók fuvarozása,

5. segélyszállítmányok fuvarozása,

6. élőállatok fuvarozása,

7. költözési javak fuvarozása,

8. postai küldemények fuvarozása,

9. művészeti tárgyak és alkotások fuvarozása,

10. rendeltetésszerűen utasokat szállító autóbuszok pótkocsijában lévő poggyász fuvarozása,

11. olyan gépjárművekkel végzett fuvarozás, amelyek megengedett össztömege - a pótkocsit is beleértve - a 6 tonnát nem haladja meg, vagy amelyek hasznos teherbírása - a pótkocsit is beleértve - a 3,5 tonnát nem haladja meg,

12. az egyik Szerződő Fél államának fuvarozója részére külföldön vásárolt gépjármű első, tranzitforgalomban történő üres áthaladása.

8. Cikk

(1) A Szerződő Felek államának illetékes hatóságai biztosítják, hogy azon gépjárművek, amelyek a másik Szerződő Fél államának területén árufuvarozás lebonyolítására engedélyt kapnak, a tömeg és a méretek engedélyezett felső határa tekintetében nem esnek kedvezőtlenebb rendelkezések hatálya alá, mint a saját államban engedélyezett gépjárművek.

(2) Amennyiben a gépjármű vagy rakományának tömege és méretei a másik Szerződő Fél államában engedélyezett felső határértéket túllépik, úgy a területén történő fuvarozáshoz ezen Szerződő Fél illetékes hatósága által kibocsátott külön engedély szükséges.

(3) A (2) bekezdésben említett engedélyben a hatóság közlekedési korlátozásokat vezethet be, vagy meghatározott közlekedési útvonal és közúti határátkelőhely igénybevételét írhatja elő.

IV. ÁLTALÁNOS RENDELKEZÉSEK

9. Cikk

(1) A Szerződő Felek államának fuvarozói kötelesek a másik Szerződő Fél államának területén végzett személyszállítás vagy árufuvarozás közben annak jogszabályait megtartani.

(2) Amennyiben az egyik Szerződő Fél államának területén bejegyzett fuvarozó ezen Egyezmény bármely rendelkezését, illetve a másik Szerződő Fél államának közúti szállításra vonatkozó nemzeti jogszabályait megsérti, a másik Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatósága, amelynek területén a rendelkezések megsértése bekövetkezett, saját jogi eljárása lefolytatásának fenntartása mellett értesíti a bejegyzés szerinti Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatóságát, amely saját nemzeti előírásaival összhangban intézkedik.

(3) A Szerződő Felek államának illetékes hatóságai tájékoztatják egymást minden, részükről a (2) bekezdés szerint megtett intézkedéséről.

10. Cikk

(1) A fuvarozónak a másik Szerződő Fél államának területére való belépésekor az illetékes hatóság felszólítására be kell mutatnia a másoknak történő károkozás esetén garanciát nyújtó felelősségbiztosítás érvényességét igazoló okmányt.

(2) Amennyiben a fuvarozó nem rendelkezik az (1) bekezdésben említett okmánnyal, a fuvarozó a másik Szerződő Fél területére való belépéskor - a hatályos nemzeti jogszabályoknak megfelelően - köteles felelősségbiztosítási szerződést kötni.

11. Cikk

(1) Magyarország területén mentesek a gépjárműadó, a Szerb Köztársaság területén pedig az útdíj megfizetése alól:

(1.1) azok a gépjárművek, amelyek ezen Egyezmény 6. Cikke (4) bekezdésében előirányzott engedélykontingens keretében végeznek áruszállítást a 6. Cikk (3) bekezdésének (3.1.) pontjában foglaltak szerinti gépjárművek kivételével,

(1.2) azok a gépjárművek, amelyek ezen Egyezmény 7. Cikkében foglaltak szerint végeznek árufuvarozást, valamint a 7. Cikk (1) bekezdés (1.1)-(1.11) pontjaiban említett fuvarozáskor az üres gépjármű közlekedése,

(1.3) azok az autóbuszok, amelyek a Szerződő Felek államainak területei között végeznek személyszállítást, vagy bármelyik Szerződő Fél államának területén keresztül végeznek tranzit személyszállítást.

(2) Az (1) bekezdésben foglalt rendelkezések nem érintik azokat az adókat, díjakat és illetékeket, amelyeket az autópályák egyes szakaszain, alagutakon, hidakon és egyéb közúti létesítményeken, illetve bizonyos városrészeken való áthaladásra vetnek ki, továbbá nem érintik azokat az illetékeket, díjakat, amelyeket a Szerződő Felek nemzeti jogszabályaik alapján a gépjárművek megengedett méretének, össztömegének, tengelyterhelésének túllépése esetén állapítanak meg.

12. Cikk

(1) A Szerb Köztársaság területére való belépéskor mentes a vámok és az azokkal azonos hatású díjak alól:

(1.1) a gépjármű- vagy autóbusz-gyártó által az adott gépjármű- vagy autóbusz-típushoz tervezett, abba gyárilag beépített üzemanyagtartályban lévő - a gépjármű vagy autóbusz meghajtását szolgáló - üzemanyag járművenként és utazásonként,

(1.2) ezen Egyezmény szerinti nemzetközi fuvarozást végző, az út során megsérült vagy meghibásodott gépjármű vagy autóbusz javításához szükséges alkatrészek és szerszámok, amelyeket - az illetékes vámhivatal által kiállított vagy hitelesített okmány alapján - ideiglenesen visznek be a Szerb Köztársaság területére.

(2) Az (1) bekezdés (1.2) pontjában megjelölt szerszámokat, valamint a fel nem használt és kicserélt alkatrészeket vissza kell szállítani a gépjárművet vagy autóbuszt bejegyző államba, illetve vámfelügyelet mellett azokat meg kell semmisíteni, vagy a Szerb Köztársaság területén érvényben lévő vámjogszabályok szerint kell eljárni.

(3) Magyarország a területére való belépéskor - az 1. Cikk (2) bekezdésére is figyelemmel - az ezen Egyezményben szabályozott forgalom tekintetében a vámok és az azokkal azonos hatású díjak, valamint a behozatali, illetve kiviteli korlátozások és tilalmak alóli mentesítés vonatkozásában az Európai Unió mindenkor hatályos vámjogszabályai szerinti mentességeket és kedvezményeket biztosítja az ott meghatározott eljárás és szabályok szerint. A Magyarország területére való belépéskor erre tekintettel mentesek a vámok és az azokkal azonos hatású díjak alól:

(3.1) a gépjármű- vagy autóbusz-gyártó által az adott gépjármű- vagy autóbusz-típushoz tervezett, abba gyárilag beépített üzemanyagtartályban lévő - a gépjármű vagy autóbusz meghajtását szolgáló - üzemanyag a vámmentességek közösségi rendszerének létrehozásáról szóló 1186/2009/EK tanácsi rendelet XXVIII. fejezetében foglaltak szerint, illetve a rendelet későbbi módosításai szerint,

(3.2) ezen Egyezmény szerinti nemzetközi fuvarozást végző, az út során megsérült vagy meghibásodott gépjármű vagy autóbusz javításához szükséges alkatrészek és szerszámok, amelyeket - a beléptető vámhivatal által igazolt okmány alapján a rájuk vonatkozó vámalakiságok egyidejű elvégzésével - ideiglenesen visznek be Magyarország területére.

(4) A Magyarország területén ezen Egyezmény szerint nemzetközi fuvarozást végző, megsérült vagy meghibásodott szerb gépjármű vagy autóbusz javítása céljából a Magyarország területére ideiglenesen bevitt alkatrészek és szerszámok vámjogi sorsát rendezni kell.

13. Cikk

A kabotázs tilos, kivéve, ha rendkívüli esetben az érintett Szerződő Fél államának illetékes hatósága a kabotázs végzésére jogosító külön engedélyt ad ki.

14. Cikk

A határátlépéssel kapcsolatos határ-, vám-, állat és növény-egészségügyi, járványügyi, valamint környezet- és természetvédelmi ellenőrzések tekintetében a Szerződő Felek a nemzeti jogszabályaik, illetve az államaik tekintetében hatályos nemzetközi szerződések rendelkezéseit alkalmazzák.

15. Cikk

A Szerződő Felek államának illetékes határforgalom ellenőrző szervei, valamint az államhatáron más, hatósági ellenőrzést végző szervek a súlyosan sérült személyek szállítása esetén, menetrend szerinti autóbusszal történő személyszállításnál, valamint élőállatot, gyorsan romló, illetve veszélyes árukat szállító gépjárművek esetében a határ-, vám-, állat- és növény-egészségügyi, járványügyi, valamint környezetvédelmi ellenőrzést soron kívül végzik.

16. Cikk

(1) Ezen Egyezmény végrehajtása és alkalmazása érdekében a Szerződő Felek Vegyesbizottságot hoznak létre, amely üléseit évente legalább egyszer, indokolt esetben soron kívül, valamelyik illetékes minisztérium kérésére tartja, felváltva a Szerződő Felek államainak területén.

(2) A Vegyesbizottság indokolt esetekben javaslatokat dolgoz ki ezen Egyezménynek a közlekedés fejlesztéséhez, valamint azon többoldalú megállapodásokhoz történő illeszkedése céljából, amelyeknek a Szerződő Felek, azaz mindkét Szerződő Fél állama részese.

(3) A Vegyesbizottság folyamatosan vizsgálja az árufuvarozás további könnyítésének lehetőségeit és ennek megfelelő javaslatokat dolgoz ki a Szerződő Felek részére.

17. Cikk

(1) Ez az Egyezmény azon későbbi jegyzék kézhezvételétől számított harmincadik (30.) napon lép hatályba, amelyben a Szerződő Felek értesítik egymást, hogy a hatálybalépéshez szükséges nemzeti jogi előírásokat teljesítették.

(2) A Szerződő Felek ezen Egyezményt határozatlan időre kötik, és azt bármelyik Szerződő Fél diplomáciai úton felmondhatja. Felmondás esetén ezen Egyezmény a felmondásról szóló értesítés kézhezvételét követő hat (6) hónap elteltével hatályát veszti.

(3) Ezen Egyezmény hatálybalépésével egyidejűleg Magyarország és a Szerb Köztársaság viszonylatában hatályát veszti:

(3.1) a Magyar Népköztársaság Kormánya és a Jugoszláv Szövetségi Népköztársaság Kormánya között a tehergépjárművel végzett árufuvarozás és az ezzel kapcsolatos vámeljárás tárgyában Budapesten, 1962. február 9-én aláírt Egyezmény, továbbá

(3.2) a Magyar Népköztársaság Kormánya és a Jugoszláv Szocialista Szövetségi Köztársaság Képviselőházának Szövetségi Végrehajtó Tanácsa között a tehergépjárművel végzett árufuvarozás, valamint az ezzel kapcsolatos vámeljárás tárgyában megkötött egyezmény módosításáról és kiegészítéséről Szegeden, 1982. június 24-én aláírt Egyezmény, valamint

(3.3) a Magyar Népköztársaság Kormánya és a Jugoszláv Szocialista Szövetségi Köztársaság Kormánya között az autóbusszal végzett nemzetközi személyszállítás tárgyában Belgrádban, 1965. január 16-án aláírt Egyezmény.

Készült Belgrádban, 2014. július 1. napján, két eredeti példányban, magyar, szerb és angol nyelven, valamennyi szöveg egyaránt hiteles. Vita esetén az angol nyelvű szöveg az irányadó.

 Magyarország Kormánya nevében

 A Szerb Köztársaság Kormánya nevében”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és 3. § az Egyezmény 17. cikkének (1) bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) Az Egyezmény, illetve a 2. § és 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter - annak ismertté válását követően - a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a közlekedésért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.