2010. évi CLXVI. törvény

az Európai Innovációs és Technológiai Intézet és a Magyar Köztársaság Kormánya közötti Székhely-megállapodás kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad az Európai Innovációs és Technológiai Intézet és a Magyar Köztársaság Kormánya közötti Székhely-megállapodás (a továbbiakban: Székhely-megállapodás) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Székhely-megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Székhely-megállapodás hiteles angol nyelvű szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„HOST AGREEMENTbetweenthe European Institute of Innovation and Technologyand the Government of the Republic of Hungary

The European Institute of Innovation and Technology („the EIT”) and the Government of the Republic of Hungary („the Government”), here in after referred to together as „the Parties”,

HAVING REGARD to Regulation (EC) No 294/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2008 establishing the European Institute of Innovation and Technology („the Regulation”), and in particular Articles 1 and 11 there of,

HAVING REGARD to the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Union („the Protocol”), and in particular Article 18 there of,

WHEREAS the Decision taken by Common Agreement between the Representatives of the Governments of Member States of 18 June 2008 on the location of the seat of the European Institute for Innovation and Technology (EIT) (2008/634/EC) provides that the EIT shall have its seat in Budapest,

WHEREAS Article 11, paragraph 2 of the Regulation specifies that the Protocol shall apply to the EIT,

WHEREAS Article 7, paragraph 1 of the Statutes of the EIT annexed to the Regulation specifies that the conditions of employment of other servants of the European Union shall apply to the Director and the statutory staff of the EIT,

WHEREAS Article 7, paragraph 2 of the Statutes of the EIT annexed to the Regulation specifies that experts may be seconded to the EIT for a limited duration by participating States or other employers,

WHEREAS further administrative provisions are needed for the implementation of certain articles of the Protocol and for additional matters,

HAVE AGREED as follows:

Article 1

Definitions

For the purposes of this Agreement and of the application of the Protocol to relations between the EIT and the Government:

(a) all references to the European Union in the Protocol shall be read as references to the EIT;

(b) all references to the officials and other servants of the European Union in the Protocol shall be read as references to the statutory staff of the EIT within the meaning of Article 7, paragraph 1 of the Statutes of the EIT annexed to the Regulation (hereinafter referred to as „the EIT Statutes”);

(c) with the exceptions of Articles 6, 12, 14 and 15 of the Protocol, references to the Council and the Commission therein shall be read as references to the Governing Board of the EIT;

(d) „statutory staff” shall mean the personnel employed directly by the EIT pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 1 of the EIT Statutes;

(e) „seconded experts” shall mean persons seconded to the EIT by participating States or other employers, pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 2 of the EIT Statutes.

(f) „experts” shall mean persons invited by the EIT to provide advisory services to the EIT.

Article 2

Legal capacity

The EIT is a European Union body and has legal personality in accordance with Article 11 of the Regulation. It shall enjoy the widest possible legal capacity accorded to legal persons under Hungarian law. It shall, in particular, have the capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property, and to be a party to legal proceedings.

Article 3

Contribution by the Government

1. The Government agrees to make a contribution towards the staff costs of the EIT. This contribution shall cover the wage costs of 20 employees of the EIT for 5 years, according to the schedule defined in Annex A.

2. The Government covers the rental fee of the premises of the EIT for 20 years.

3. The Government shall provide a suitable and prestigious location in the technology centre of Budapest Infopark or in its vicinity. The premises shall respond to the requirements, conditions and specifications listed in Annex B, which also specifies the respective responsibilities of the EIT and the Government in relation to the upkeep of the premises.

Article 4

Inviolability

1. The premises of the EIT, irrespective of ownership, shall be inviolable. They shall be exempt from search, requisition, confiscation or expropriation. The property and assets of the EIT, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall not be subject to any administrative or legal measure of constraint, whether by executive, administrative, judicial or legislative action, without the authorization of the Court of Justice of the European Union.

2. No official of the Hungarian authorities shall enter the premises of the EIT without prior approval of the Director of the EIT or his/her authorized representative. Such approval shall be presumed in case of fire or other disasters which could constitute a danger for public health and safety.

3. The archives of the EIT, its official correspondence and, any document pertaining to it or being under its possession and intended for its official use shall be inviolable.

4. The Government shall take all appropriate steps to ensure the protection of the premises of the EIT. Upon request by the Director of the EIT, the Government shall supply the necessary support for the maintenance of order within the premises.

Article 5

Flag and emblem

The EIT shall be entitled to display its flag and emblem on its premises, and to display its flag on vehicles used for official purposes.

Article 6

Facilities for communications

1. The EIT shall enjoy, in respect of its official communications, treatment not less favourable than that accorded by the Government to any other government including its diplomatic missions or to other intergovernmental organizations in the matter of priorities, tariffs and charges on mail, cablegrams, telephotos, telephone, telegraph, telex and other communications.

2. The Government shall secure the inviolability of the official communications and correspondence to and from the EIT and shall not apply any censorship to such communications and correspondence. Such inviolability, without limitation by reason of this enumeration, shall extend to publications, still and moving pictures, videos and films and sound recordings, regardless of their size and number.

3. The EIT shall have the right to use codes and to dispatch and receive correspondence and other official materials by courier or in sealed bags which shall have the same privileges and immunities as diplomatic couriers and bags.

Article 7

Public services

1. To the extent requested by the Director, the Government shall ensure that the EIT is supplied with the public services necessary for performing its functions with the same priority as those of essential agencies of the Government. In case of any interruption or threatened interruption of any such services, the appropriate Hungarian authorities shall consider the needs of EIT as being of equal importance as those of essential agencies of the Government and shall take steps accordingly to ensure that the work of EIT is not prejudiced.

2. Public services for the purpose of this provision include, but are not limited to, electricity, water, sewerage, fire protection, refuse collection, gas, post and telephone.

Article 8

Fiscal and customs treatment of the EIT

1. The EIT, its assets, revenues and other property, shall be exempt from all direct taxes. This applies not only to property and assets owned by the EIT, but also to property and assets that are rented by the EIT or otherwise made available to it, where such direct taxes would otherwise be charged to the EIT.

2. The EIT shall be exempt from excise duties, sales charges, and other indirect taxes when it is making substantial purchases for official use by the EIT of movable and immovable property or services on which such duties or taxes are normally chargeable. Exemption from value added tax, excise duty and other indirect taxes concerning acquisition of goods and services in Hungary made by the EIT is provided by means of tax refund, in accordance with the procedural rules foreseen for diplomatic missions in Hungary.

3. No exemption shall be granted in respect of taxes and dues which amount merely to charges for public utility services.

4. The EIT will be exempt from paying motor vehicle registration duty (Regisztrációs adó), provided its motor vehicles are placed into service with a DT registration plate.

5. The EIT shall be exempt from all customs duties, prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of articles intended for its official use. However, the EIT will have to comply with the relevant customs clearance procedures. Goods so imported shall not be disposed of, whether or not in return for payment, in the territory of Hungary, unless an express exemption from this prohibition is provided in the relevant rules or granted by the Government on an ad hoc basis.

6. The EIT shall also be exempt from any customs duties and any prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of its publications.

7. Relief from customs duty is based on the relevant customs legislation of the European Union.

Article 9

Director and statutory staff

1. In accordance with Article 11, paragraph 2 of the Regulation, Articles 11 to 15 and 17 of the Protocol shall apply to the Director and to the statutory staff. In conformity with and in addition to the privileges and immunities granted by the above-mentioned provisions, the following provisions shall apply to the Director and to the statutory staff:

(a) Salaries, wages and emoluments paid by the EIT, as well as retirement, invalidity and survivor’s pensions paid by the European Union shall be exempt from national taxes.

(b) The tax authorities shall refund the value added tax and excise duty included in the price of articles and services acquired by the Director and the statutory staff in the Hungarian market within two years from taking up their post in Hungary, in accordance with the relevant rules foreseen for the reimbursement of the value added tax and excise duty to resident officials of international organizations in Hungary, provided they are not nationals of or permanent residents in Hungary.

(c) When transferring their normal place of residence from a third country to the customs territory of the Community the Director and the statutory staff are entitled to import their personal property, including furniture, household effects and a motor vehicle for personal use, free of customs duty.

(d) Relief shall be granted only in respect of personal property entered for free circulation within 12 months from the date of establishment, by the person concerned, of his normal place of residence in the customs territory of the Community.

(e) Within 12 months after duty-free entry, personal property may not be lent, given as security, hired out or transferred, whether for a consideration or free of charge, without prior notification to the competent authorities. Otherwise the relevant import duties shall be paid on the property concerned, at the rate applying on the date of such loan, giving as security, hiring out or transfer, on the basis of the type of property and the customs value ascertained or accepted on that date by the competent authorities.

(f) The Director and the statutory staff shall be exempt from paying motor vehicle registration duty provided the motor vehicle is placed into service with a DT or CK registration plate and they are not nationals of or permanent residents in Hungary.

2. The Director and the statutory staff shall be exempt from all compulsory contributions to the social security organisations of Hungary. Consequently, they shall not be covered by the social security regulations of Hungary, unless they voluntarily join the Hungarian Social Security System.

3. The provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the members of the family forming part of the household of the Director and the statutory staff, unless they are employed in Hungary by an employer other than the EIT or receive social security benefits from Hungary.

4. In addition to the privileges and immunities specified in paragraphs 1 to 3, the Director and the members of his/her family forming part of his household, provided they are not Hungarian nationals or have held permanent residence status before being employed by the EIT, shall be accorded, in Hungary, the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilities accorded to the heads of diplomatic missions and the members of their family in accordance with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April 1961. This applies also to persons fulfilling the functions of the Director on a temporary basis for a period of at least two months.

Article 10

Seconded experts

1. As regards seconded experts, the following provisions apply:

(a) Any emoluments, allowances and other payments that are paid by the EIT shall be exempt from national taxes.

(b) The tax authorities shall refund the value added tax and excise duty included in the price of articles and services acquired by the seconded experts in the Hungarian market, in accordance with the relevant rules foreseen for the reimbursement of the value added tax and excise duty to resident officials of international organizations in Hungary, provided they are not nationals of or permanent residents in Hungary.

(c) When transferring their normal place of residence from a third country to the customs territory of the Community the seconded experts are entitled to import their personal property, including furniture, household effects and a motor vehicle for personal use, free of customs duty.

(d) Relief shall be granted only in respect of personal property entered for free circulation within 12 months from the date of establishment, by the person concerned, of his normal place of residence in the customs territory of the Community.

(e) Within 12 months after duty-free entry, personal property may not be lent, given as security, hired out or transferred, whether for a consideration or free of charge, without prior notification to the competent authorities. Otherwise the relevant import duties shall be paid on the property concerned, at the rate applying on the date of such loan, giving as security, hiring out or transfer, on the basis of the type of property and the customs value ascertained or accepted on that date by the competent authorities.

(f) The seconded experts shall be exempt from paying motor vehicle registration duty provided the motor vehicle is placed into service with a CK registration plate, provided they stay in Hungary for at least six months and they are not nationals of or permanent residents in Hungary.

2. Salaries, wages, emoluments, allowances and other payments that are paid by the organization that seconds these persons to the EIT, where this organization is located outside Hungary shall be covered by the relevant double-taxation treaty.

3. For as long as they remain covered by the social security system in the country from which they are seconded to the EIT, the seconded experts shall be exempt from all compulsory contributions to the social security organisations of Hungary. Consequently, during that time they shall not be covered by the social security regulations of Hungary, unless they voluntarily join the Hungarian Social Security System.

4. The provisions of paragraph 3 of this Article shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the members of the family forming part of the household of the seconded experts, unless they are employed in Hungary by an employer other than the EIT or receive social security benefits from Hungary.

Article 11

EIT Governing Board

1. Article 11 points (a) to (c) and Article 17 of the Protocol shall apply to the Members of the Governing Board of the EIT.

2. Remuneration, honoraria and allowances paid by the EIT shall be exempt from national taxes and social security contributions.

Article 12

Entry and stay

1. The Government shall take all appropriate measures to facilitate the entry into, stay in and exit from its territory of the following persons, irrespective of their nationality:

(a) the members of the Governing Board;

(b) the Director, the statutory staff and seconded experts;

(c) the members of the family forming part of the household of (a) and (b), as well as

(d) any experts invited by the EIT.

2. Visa, when needed by the persons referred to in paragraph 1, shall be granted as promptly as possible. The EIT shall notify the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary via diplomatic channels about visa applications prior to lodging them at the respective Hungarian consulates.

3. The Director, the statutory staff and seconded experts, as well as the members of their family forming part of their household shall be exempt from all immigration restrictions.

4. This Article shall not prevent the requirement of reasonable evidence to be provided by the EIT to establish that persons claiming the treatment provided for in this Article fall under one of the categories referred to in paragraph 1.

Article 13

Employment

1. Members of the family forming part of the household of the Director, of the statutory staff, as well as of the seconded experts shall enjoy access to the labour market without requiring work permit, while in Hungary and for the duration of the employment of the Director, the given statutory staff or seconded expert with the EIT in Hungary.

2. Persons mentioned in paragraph 1 who obtain gainful employment in Hungary shall enjoy no immunity from criminal, civil or administrative jurisdiction with respect to matters arising in the course of or in connection with such employment.

Article 14

Limitation of immunities

The immunity granted to any person on the basis of this Agreement

(a) shall not apply to traffic offences and

(b) shall not extend to civil action by a third party for damages, including personal injury or death, arising from a traffic accident caused by such a person.

Article 15

Prevention of abuses

1. The privileges and immunities granted under the provisions of this Agreement are conferred in the interest of the EIT and not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. It is the duty of the EIT and all persons enjoying such privileges and immunities to observe in all other respects the laws and regulations of Hungary.

2. The EIT shall co-operate at all times with the appropriate Hungarian authorities to facilitate the proper administration of justice and shall prevent any abuse of the privileges and immunities granted under the provisions of this Agreement.

3. The Director of the EIT shall waive the immunity of the statutory staff and the seconded experts in all cases where such immunity would impede the course of justice, and where it can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the EIT.

4. The Governing Board shall waive the immunity of the Director of the EIT in all cases where such immunity would impede the course of justice, and where it can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the EIT.

5. The Governing Board shall waive the immunity of any member of the Governing Board of the EIT in all cases where such immunity would impede the course of justice, and where it can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the EIT.

6. Should the Government consider that an abuse of a privilege or immunity conferred by this Agreement has occurred, the EIT shall, upon request, consult with the appropriate Hungarian authorities to decide whether any such abuse has occurred.

Article 16

Notification of appointments, identity cards

1. The EIT shall inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary when the Director, a member of the statutory staff or a seconded expert takes up or relinquishes his/her duties. Each year the EIT shall send a list of the names and addresses of the Director, the statutory staff, as well as the seconded experts to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary.

2. At the request of the EIT, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Hungary shall issue to the Director, the statutory staff, as well as the seconded experts and to the members of their family forming part of their household, provided they are not nationals of or permanent residents in Hungary, special identity cards certifying the position and status of the person.

Article 17

Social security

1. The EIT shall be exempt from all compulsory contributions to social security schemes in Hungary in respect of the Director, the statutory staff, the seconded experts, as well as the members of the Governing Board.

2. The Director and the statutory staff shall have the social security coverage according to the Regulations and Rules applicable to officials and other servants of the European Union.

Article 18

Settlement of disputes

1. All disputes between the EIT and the Government relating to the application of this Agreement should, where possible, be settled amicably by direct negotiations.

2. In the event of failure to settle amicably a dispute, the dispute shall be referred to the Court of Justice of the European Union by the EIT or by the Government after having given the other party two months notice in advance of its intention of referring the matter to the said Court of Justice.

Article 19

Exclusion of liability for Hungary

The Republic of Hungary shall not bear, by reason of the activities of the EIT on the Hungarian territory, any international liability for acts or omissions of the EIT, its Director, statutory staff, seconded experts, or any experts invited by the EIT.

Article 20

Final provisions

1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth day following the date on which the EIT and the Government have notified each other of the completion of the procedures required for each of them to be bound by it.

2. This Agreement shall remain in force until the completion of the winding up of the EIT, unless agreed otherwise by the Parties.

3. This Agreement may be amended by mutual consent of the Parties. Such amendments shall enter into force in accordance with paragraph 1 of the present Article.

4. Either Party may terminate the present Agreement by means of a written notice to the other Party. Termination shall take effect six months following the date of the notification.

Done in duplicate at Budapest, this 23rd day of March 2010.

 FOR THE EUROPEAN INSTITUTE OF INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY

 FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF HUNGARY

ANNEX A

Contribution towards the staff costs of the EIT

1. The total value of this contribution represents the average wage costs of 20 employees of the EIT for 5 years.

2. This contribution shall be made from 2011 in five annual payments of 1’560’000 €, payable by March 31 of the year in question at the latest.

3. The Government of Hungary therefore agrees to provide this commitment according to the following payment schedule:

 

 amount payable

 date by which the EIT shall receive payment

 3.1.

 ............ 1’560’000 €

 ............ 31.03.2011

 3.2.

 ............ 1’560’000 €

 ............ 31.03.2012

 3.3.

 ............ 1’560’000 €

 ............ 31.03.2013

 3.4.

 ............ 1’560’000 €

 ............ 31.03.2014

 3.5.

 ............ 1’560’000 €

 ............ 31.03.2015

ANNEX B

Permanent premises of the EIT

1. Location: The permanent premises shall be located on floors 5 and 6 of Building E of the Budapest Infopark (address: Budapest, 11th district, Neumann János utca 1/E., lot number 4082/21). These two floors shall have a total gross usable space of 2807,3 m2. The gross usable space of the permanent premises is based on the needs of an estimated staff of 60 persons and meeting room space appropriate for the activities of the EIT.

2. The EIT shall have the exclusive use of the floor-space, storage rooms, changing room, bicycle storage and 22 covered parking spaces as indicated in the attached drawings of floors 5 and 6 and the additional surfaces on floors -1 and -3.

3. The EIT shall have the exclusive use of storage rooms 

-3 floor, garage level, 453,49 m2

4. The EIT shall have the exclusive use of a changing room and bicycle storage 

-1 floor, garage level, 44,00 m2

5. The EIT shall have the exclusive use of 22 covered car parking spaces for the EIT.

- 3 floor, garage level: 10 parking spaces (place: 3-093.-3-102.)

and -1 floor, garage level: 12 (1 disabled space) parking spaces (place: 1-001.-1-0012.)

6. The premises shall be available from 1.12.2009 until 30.11.2029.

7. Specifications:

7.1. The premises shall be in conformity with the normal standards applicable in Budapest and also respect the rules of the European Commission on Policy on buildings and infrastructure laid down in the Communication from the Commission on Buildings Policy and Infrastructure in Brussels and the „Manual of Standard Building Specifications” of the Office for Infrastructure and Logistics in Brussels.

7.2. The 2 floors shall be linked by a dedicated staircase serving only these two floors. It will be ensured by an access card system that only the EIT staff and their guests will be allowed to enter the EIT headquarters.

7.3. The premises shall satisfy the requirements of persons with special needs; in particular, the dedicated connection between the 2 floors shall be available also to wheelchair users.

7.4. For the period of 20 years during which the Government covers the costs as specified in point 5 below, the Government shall ensure that the premises are in full working condition for the purposes for which the EIT will use them. In particular, the Government is responsible for the following equipment, including its maintenance, repair and renewal:

7.4.1. fully functional sanitary facilities and plumbing

7.4.2. fully functional heating and air-conditioning equipment

7.4.3. fully functioning supply of electrical power with cabling and sockets throughout the floorspace

7.4.4. cabling and connection points for telephone/IT systems/networks that are evenly accessible throughout the floorspace

7.4.5. carpets, lighting, internal walls and doors, arranged as specified by the EIT in a memorandum to this agreement.

7.5. During the said period of 20 years, should the premises or any part thereof, become unavailable for any reason, the Government shall secure appropriate alternatives for the period of this unavailability.

8. Financial Contribution by the Government: For the period as it is mentioned in article 6, Hungary shall provide the permanent premises free of charge in full working condition for the purposes for which the EIT will use them. This includes exclusively the payment of -

8.1. rent

8.1.1. real estate taxes

8.1.2. costs related to the real estate insurance and the Lessor’s liability insurance

8.2. maintenance fee that includes the following

8.2.1. real estate maintenance and upkeep

8.2.2. 24 hours reception, security services and garage services

8.2.3. Gardening and upkeep of the internal passages

8.2.4. Clearing away of snow

8.2.5. Cleaning of the surfaces in the common/shared areas (daily, weekly, quarter yearly) eg. outside windows, common used corridors, etc.

8.2.6. Cleaning of the external surfaces and real estates facades, fronts

8.2.7. Costs of the public utilities for shared areas and facilities (for instance lighting, lifts etc.)

8.2.8. Operational and Renovation costs, such as maintenance, repairs, renovation and changes of surface-cover, structural elements as well as the mechanical and electricity systems of the building,

8.2.9. Management fees of the maintenance and upkeep of the real estate, fees charged during the public authority controls

8.2.10. Fire service trainings, fire security equipments

8.2.11. Insect and rodent clearing

8.2.12. Removal of litter (normal amount)

9. After the end of the said period of 20 years, when the Government ceases to make its contribution regarding premises, the EIT will arrange the appropriate procedure for securing appropriate premises from that moment onwards. The Government will provide the utmost assistance to the EIT here.

10. The Government shall pursue any modifications or renewal to the contract with the owner of the building in consultation with the EIT.

11. Should the permanent premises be unavailable on the date of 1.12.2009 or subsequently become unavailable for any reason, the Government shall make temporary facilities available under the same conditions. The premises shall be in conformity with the normal standards applicable in Budapest and also respect the rules of the European Commission on Policy on buildings and infrastructure laid down in the Communication from the Commission on Buildings Policy and Infrastructure in Brussels and the „Manual of Standard Building Specifications” of the Office for Infrastructure and Logistics in Brussels.

12. The following costs shall be borne by the EIT:

12.1. Individual metered consumption of the EIT (water and electricity).

12.2. The costs of cleaning the areas of exclusive use for the EIT.

12.3. The cost of obtaining, installing and operating technical devices and facilities of exclusive use for the EIT, such as telephones, PCs, other IT equipment, CCTV (7 cameras are provided by the Government, any additional cameras should be paid by EIT) equipment inside the space used exclusively by the EIT.

12.4. All other working facilities like furniture, office devices etc.

12.5. Facility management costs

SZÉKHELY-MEGÁLLAPODÁSaz Európai Innovációs és Technológiai Intézetésa Magyar Köztársaság Kormányaközött

Az Európai Innovációs és Technológiai Intézet („EIT”) és Magyar Köztársaság Kormánya („Kormány”), további együttes említésük esetén „Felek”,

TEKINTETTEL az Európai Parlament és a Tanács 294/2008/EK rendeletére (2008. március 11.) az Európai Innovációs és Technológiai Intézet létrehozásáról („Rendelet”), különösképpen annak 1. és 11. Cikkeire,

TEKINTETTEL az Európai Unió kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szóló jegyzőkönyvre („Jegyzőkönyv”), különösképpen annak 18. Cikkére,

MIVEL az Európai Innovációs és Technológiai Intézet (EIT) székhelyének elhelyezkedéséről szóló, a tagállamok kormányainak képviselői által közös megállapodás révén meghozott 2008. június 18-i 2008/634/EK határozat értelmében az EIT székhelye Budapest,

MIVEL a Rendelet 11. Cikkének 2. bekezdése úgy rendelkezik, hogy a Jegyzőkönyvet az EIT-re is alkalmazni kell,

MIVEL a Rendelet mellékletét képező EIT Alapszabály 7. Cikkének 1. bekezdése akként rendelkezik, hogy az Igazgatóra és az EIT alkalmazottaira az Európai Unió egyéb alkalmazottainak alkalmazási feltételei vonatkoznak,

MIVEL a Rendelet mellékletét képező EIT Alapszabály 7. Cikkének 2. bekezdése értelmében a részt vevő államok vagy más munkáltatók meghatározott időre szakértőket küldhetnek az EIT-hez,

MIVEL a Jegyzőkönyv bizonyos cikkeinek végrehajtásához és egyéb kérdésekben további adminisztratív rendelkezések szükségesek,

AZ ALÁBBIAKBAN állapodnak meg:

1. Cikk

Fogalmak

A jelen Megállapodás, valamint a Jegyzőkönyvnek az EIT és a Kormány közötti kapcsolatok vonatkozásában történő alkalmazása során:

a) a Jegyzőkönyvben szereplő Európai Unióra vonatkozó összes hivatkozást az EIT-re vonatkozó hivatkozásnak kell tekinteni;

b) a Jegyzőkönyvnek az Európai Unió tisztviselőire és egyéb alkalmazottaira vonatkozó összes hivatkozását a Rendelet mellékletét képező EIT Alapszabály (a továbbiakban: „EIT Alapszabály”) 7. Cikkének 1. bekezdése alá tartozó tisztviselőkre vonatkozó hivatkozásnak kell tekinteni;

c) a Jegyzőkönyv 6., 12., 14. és 15. Cikkeinek kivételével, az abban szereplő, Tanácsra és Bizottságra vonatkozó hivatkozásokat az EIT Igazgatótanácsára vonatkozó hivatkozásnak kell tekinteni;

d) „tisztviselők” alatt az EIT Alapszabály 7. Cikkének 1. bekezdése alapján az EIT közvetlen alkalmazásában álló személyzet értendő;

e) „kirendelt szakértők” alatt a részt vevő államok vagy más munkáltatók által az EIT Alapszabály 7. Cikkének 2. bekezdése alapján EIT mellé rendelt szakértőket kell érteni;

f) „szakértők” alatt az EIT által a részére tanácsadói szolgáltatások nyújtása céljából meghívott személyek értendők.

2. Cikk

Jogképesség

Az EIT a Rendelet 11. Cikkének megfelelően jogi személyiséggel bíró európai uniós szerv, amely élvezi a magyar jog által a jogi személyek részére biztosított legszélesebb körű jogképességet, és amely különösképpen rendelkezik szerződőképességgel, ingó és ingatlanvagyon megszerzésének és az azzal való rendelkezésnek a képességével, valamint a jogi eljárásokban való részvétel képességével.

3. Cikk

A Kormány által nyújtott támogatás

1. A Kormány vállalja, hogy hozzájárul az EIT személyzetének költségeihez. Ez a hozzájárulás - az A. mellékletben meghatározott táblázatnak megfelelően - fedezi az EIT 20 alkalmazottjának 5 évre szóló bérköltségeit.

2. A Kormány 20 évig fedezi az EIT épületeinek bérleti díjait.

3. A Kormány köteles alkalmas és tekintélyt sugárzó helyszínt biztosítani az Infopark Budapest technológiai központjában vagy annak szomszédságában. Az épületeknek meg kell felelniük a B. mellékletben felsorolt előírásoknak, feltételeknek és specifikációknak. A B. melléklet emellett meghatározza a Kormánynak, illetőleg az EIT-nek az épületek fenntartásával kapcsolatos kötelezettségeit is.

4. Cikk

Sérthetetlenség

1. Az EIT épületei - tulajdoni viszonyokra tekintet nélkül - sérthetetlenek, és mentesek a házkutatás, igénybevétel, elkobzás és kisajátítás alól. Az Európai Unió Bíróságának engedélye nélkül az EIT tulajdona és követelései - függetlenül azok helyétől és birtokosától - nem képezhetik semmiféle közigazgatási vagy jogi - akár végrehajtási, közigazgatási, bírósági vagy jogalkotói intézkedésből eredő - kényszerintézkedés tárgyát.

2. A magyar hatóságok tisztviselői az EIT Igazgatójának vagy az ő felhatalmazott képviselőjének előzetes jóváhagyása nélkül nem léphetnek be az EIT épületeibe. E jóváhagyás meglétét vélelmezni kell tűzvész, vagy egyéb olyan katasztrófák esetén, amelyek a közegészséget és biztonságot veszélyeztethetik.

3. Az EIT irattára, hivatalos levelezése, továbbá minden, hozzá tartozó vagy a birtokában lévő, hivatalos felhasználásra szánt dokumentum sérthetetlen.

4. A Kormány köteles megfelelő lépéseket tenni azért, hogy az EIT épületeinek védelmét biztosítsa. Az EIT Igazgatójának kérésére a Kormány köteles biztosítani az épületeken belüli rend fenntartásához szükséges támogatást.

5. Cikk

Zászló és embléma

EIT jogosult arra, hogy az épületein elhelyezze zászlóját és emblémáját, valamint, hogy a hivatalos célokra igénybevett járművein zászlóját elhelyezze.

6. Cikk

Kapcsolattartási könnyítések

1. Az EIT-t hivatalos érintkezése tekintetében legalább olyan kedvező elbánás illeti meg, mint amelyet a Kormány a levelezés, a kábeltáviratok, távfénymásolatok, távbeszélő-, távirati-, telex, illetve más közlések elsőbbsége, díja és illetéke tekintetében bármely más kormánynak, ideértve annak diplomáciai képviseleteit is, vagy más kormányközi nemzetközi szervezetnek biztosít.

2. A Kormány biztosítja az EIT-nek küldött, illetve EIT által küldött közlések és levelezés sérthetetlenségét, és nem alkalmaz semmilyen cenzúrát a közlések és a levelezés tekintetében. Ez a sérthetetlenség kiterjed többek között a kiadványokra, álló- és mozgóképekre, videó-, film- és hangfelvételekre, függetlenül azok terjedelmétől és számától.

3. Az EIT-nek joga van rejtjel alkalmazására, valamint arra, hogy levelezést és más hivatalos anyagokat olyan futárok útján vagy lepecsételt poggyászban továbbítson, illetve kapjon meg, amelyek a diplomáciai futárokkal és a diplomáciai poggyásszal azonos kiváltságokat és mentességeket élveznek.

7. Cikk

Közüzemi szolgáltatások

1. Az Igazgató kérésének megfelelően, a Kormány a legfontosabb kormányzati szervekkel azonos elsőbbséggel biztosítja az EIT számára a munkavégzéshez szükséges közüzemi szolgáltatásokat. Ezen szolgáltatások megszakadása vagy annak veszélye esetén a megfelelő magyar hatóságoknak az EIT szükségleteit a legfontosabb kormányzati szervek szükségleteivel azonos jelentőségűnek kell tekinteniük, és ennek megfelelő lépéseket kell tenniük a EIT zavartalan működésének biztosítása végett.

2. A jelen rendelkezés alkalmazásában a közüzemi szolgáltatások körébe tartozik - nem kizárólagos jelleggel - az áramellátás, a vízellátás, a szennyvízelvezetés, a tűzvédelem, a szemétszállítás, a gázellátás, a postai és a telefonszolgáltatás.

8. Cikk

Az EIT adó- és vámügyi elbírálása

1. Az EIT, annak eszközei, bevételei és más vagyontárgyai valamennyi közvetlen adó alól mentességet élveznek. Ez nem csupán az EIT tulajdonában álló vagyontárgyakra és eszközökre vonatkozik, hanem az általa bérelt vagy részére egyéb módon hozzáférhetővé tett vagyontárgyakra és eszközökre is, amennyiben ezek a közvetlen adók egyébként az EIT-vel szemben kerülnének kiszabásra.

2. Az EIT mentességet élvez a jövedéki adók, forgalmi adók és egyéb közvetett adók alól, amennyiben az EIT általi hivatalos felhasználás céljából olyan ingó- és ingatlanvagyon, illetve szolgáltatások nagymértékű beszerzését végzi, amelyekre az ilyen vámok és adók általában kivethetők. Az EIT által, Magyarország területén beszerzett termékek és szolgáltatások vonatkozásában, az általános forgalmi adó, jövedéki adó és egyéb közvetett adók alóli mentesség biztosítása adóvisszatérítés formájában történik, a magyarországi diplomáciai képviseletekre vonatkozó eljárási szabályok szerint.

3. A közüzemi szolgáltatások fejében járó díjnak megfelelő adók és terhek vonatkozásában nem adható mentesség.

4. Az EIT mentességet élvez a gépjárművek regisztrációs adójának megfizetése alól, amennyiben gépjárműveit DT rendszámtáblával helyezik forgalomba.

5. Az EIT a hivatalos használatra szánt cikkek vonatkozásában mentességet élvez minden vám, valamint import- és exporttilalom és -korlátozás alól. Mindazonáltal, az EIT eleget kell, hogy tegyen az irányadó vámkezelési eljárásoknak. Az ilyen módon behozott áruktól Magyarország területén nem lehet - akár ellenérték fejében, akár ingyenesen - megválni, kivéve, amennyiben e tilalom alól az irányadó szabályok vagy eseti jelleggel a Kormány kifejezett mentességet biztosítanak.

6. Az EIT emellett mentességet élvez az összes vám, valamint import- és exporttilalom és -korlátozás alól a kiadványai tekintetében.

7. A vámmentesség az Európai Unió vonatkozó jogszabályain alapul.

9. Cikk

Az Igazgató és a tisztviselők

1. A Rendelet 11. Cikkének 2. bekezdésével összhangban a Jegyzőkönyv 11-15., valamint 17. Cikkeit az Igazgatóra és a tisztviselőkre is alkalmazni kell. A fent említett rendelkezések által biztosított kiváltságokkal és mentességekkel összhangban, továbbá ezek mellett az Igazgatóra és a tisztviselőkre a következő rendelkezések vonatkoznak:

a) Az EIT által kifizetett illetmények, bérek és járandóságok, valamint az Európai Unió által kifizetett öregségi, rokkantsági, illetőleg özvegyi nyugdíjak mentesek a nemzeti adók alól.

b) Az Igazgató és a tisztviselők által a magyar piacon - magyarországi hivataluk elfoglalásától számított két évig - beszerzett árucikkek és szolgáltatások árában benne foglalt áfát és jövedéki adót az adóhatóságok a Magyarország területén működő nemzetközi szervezetek itt tartózkodó tisztviselői részére történő áfa és jövedéki adó visszatérítésére vonatkozó szabályok szerint térítik vissza, feltéve, hogy e személyek nem magyar állampolgárok vagy magyarországi állandó lakosok.

c) A harmadik országbeli szokásos tartózkodási helyének a Közösség vámterületére történő áthelyezésekor az Igazgató és a tisztviselő jogosult személyes vagyontárgyainak (beleértve bútorait, háztartási célú ingóságait és egy személyes használatra szánt gépjárművét) vámmentes behozatalára.

d) Mentesség kizárólag az érintett személy által a szokásos lakóhelyének a Közösség vámterületére történő áthelyezésétől számított tizenkét hónapon belül szabad forgalomba bocsátott személyes vagyontárgy vonatkozásában adható meg.

e) A vámmentes behozatalt követő 12 hónapon belül a személyes vagyontárgy nem adható kölcsönbe, zálogba, bérbe és nem ruházható át, sem visszterhesen, sem ingyenesen, az illetékes hatóságok előzetes értesítése nélkül. Ezzel ellentétes magatartás az érintett vagyontárgyra vonatkozó behozatali vámok megfizetését vonja maga után, az ilyen kölcsönbe-, zálogba-, bérbeadás vagy átruházás napján a vagyontárgy fajtája alapján alkalmazandó vámtétel, és az ezen a napon az illetékes hatóságok által megállapított vagy elfogadott vámérték alapján.

f) Az Igazgató és a tisztviselő mentes a gépjárművek regisztrációs adójának megfizetése alól, feltéve, hogy a gépjármű DT vagy CK rendszámtáblával kerül forgalomba helyezésre, valamint feltéve, hogy ezen személyek nem magyar állampolgárok vagy magyarországi állandó lakosok.

2. Az Igazgató és a tisztviselők mentesek magyarországi társadalombiztosítási szervezetek részére fizetendő valamennyi kötelező járulék megfizetése alól. Következésképpen, e személyekre a magyar társadalombiztosítási szabályok nem vonatkoznak, kivéve, ha önkéntesen csatlakoznak a magyar társadalombiztosítási rendszerhez.

3. A jelen Cikk 2. bekezdését megfelelően alkalmazni kell az Igazgató, illetőleg a tisztviselő velük egy háztartásban élő családtagjaira is, kivéve, ha ezen személyek Magyarországon az EIT-n kívüli egyéb munkáltató alkalmazásában állnak, vagy Magyarországról társadalombiztosítási juttatásokban részesülnek.

4. Az 1-3. bekezdésekben meghatározott kiváltságokon és mentességeken túlmenően, valamint feltéve, hogy nem magyar állampolgárok, illetve az EIT-nél történt alkalmazásukat megelőzően nem voltak magyarországi állandó lakosok, az Igazgató és a vele egy háztartásban élő családtagjai részére Magyarországon biztosítani kell a diplomáciai képviseletek vezetőinek és családtagjaiknak, a diplomáciai kapcsolatokról szóló, 1961. április 18-án aláírt Bécsi Egyezmény alapján biztosított kiváltságokat és mentességeket, kivételeket és könnyítéseket. Ezeket a rendelkezéseket alkalmazni kell az Igazgató feladatait ideiglenes jelleggel, legalább két hónap időtartamban ellátó személyekre is.

10. Cikk

Kirendelt szakértők

1. A kirendelt szakértők tekintetében a következő rendelkezések az irányadók:

a) Valamennyi EIT által fizetett járandóság, juttatás, vagy más fizetség mentes a nemzeti adók alól.

b) A kirendelt szakértők által a magyar piacon beszerzett árucikkek és szolgáltatások árában benne foglalt áfát és jövedéki adót az adóhatóságok a Magyarország területén működő nemzetközi szervezetek itt tartózkodó tisztviselői részére történő áfa és jövedéki adó visszatérítésére vonatkozó szabályok szerint térítik vissza, feltéve, hogy e személyek nem magyar állampolgárok vagy magyarországi állandó lakosok.

c) A harmadik országbeli szokásos tartózkodási helyének a Közösség vámterületére történő áthelyezésekor kirendelt szakértő jogosult személyes vagyontárgyainak (beleértve bútorait, háztartási célú ingóságait és egy személyes használatra szánt gépjárművét) vámmentes behozatalára.

d) Mentesség kizárólag az érintett személy által a szokásos lakóhelyének a Közösség vámterületére történő áthelyezésétől számított tizenkét hónapon belül szabad forgalomba bocsátott személyes vagyontárgy vonatkozásában adható meg.

e) A vámmentes behozatalt követő 12 hónapon belül a személyes vagyontárgy nem adható kölcsönbe, zálogba, bérbe és nem ruházható át, sem visszterhesen, sem ingyenesen, az illetékes hatóságok előzetes értesítése nélkül. Ezzel ellentétes magatartás az érintett vagyontárgyra vonatkozó behozatali vámok megfizetését vonja maga után, az ilyen kölcsönbe-, zálogba-, bérbeadás vagy átruházás napján a vagyontárgy fajtája alapján alkalmazandó vámtétel, és az ezen a napon az illetékes hatóságok által megállapított vagy elfogadott vámérték alapján.

f) A kirendelt szakértők mentességet élveznek a gépjárművek regisztrációs adójának megfizetése alól, feltéve, hogy a gépjármű CK rendszámtáblával kerül forgalomba helyezésre, valamint, hogy ezen személyek legalább hat hónapot tartózkodnak Magyarországon, és nem magyar állampolgárok vagy magyarországi állandó lakosok.

2. Ezen személyeket az EIT mellé rendelő szervezet által fizetett illetmények, bérek, járandóságok, juttatások és egyéb kifizetések - amennyiben ez a szervezet Magyarország területén kívül található - a kettős adóztatás elkerülésére vonatkozó, irányadó egyezmény hatálya alá tartoznak.

3. Mindaddig, amíg az EIT mellé rendelő állam társadalombiztosítási rendszere alá tartoznak, a kirendelt szakértők mentesek a magyarországi társadalombiztosítási szervezetek részére fizetendő valamennyi kötelező járulék megfizetése alól. Következésképpen, e személyekre ezen idő alatt a magyar társadalombiztosítási szabályok nem vonatkoznak, kivéve, ha önkéntesen csatlakoznak a magyar társadalombiztosítási rendszerhez.

4. A jelen Cikk 3. bekezdését megfelelően alkalmazni kell a kirendelt szakértők velük egy háztartásban élő családtagjaira is, kivéve, ha ezen személyek Magyarországon az EIT-n kívüli egyéb munkáltató alkalmazásában állnak, vagy Magyarországról társadalombiztosítási juttatásokban részesülnek.

11. Cikk

Az EIT Igazgatótanácsa

1. Az EIT Igazgatótanácsának tagjaira a Jegyzőkönyv 11. Cikkének (a)-(c) pontjait, valamint 17. Cikkét kell alkalmazni.

2. Az EIT által kifizetett díjazás, honorárium és juttatás mentes a nemzeti adók és társadalombiztosítási járulékok alól.

12. Cikk

Beutazás és tartózkodás

1. A Kormány köteles minden szükséges intézkedést megtenni annak érdekében, hogy a következő személyeknek az ország területére történő beutazását, ottani tartózkodását és a területéről való kiutazását állampolgárságuktól függetlenül megkönnyítse:

a) az Igazgatótanács tagjai;

b) az Igazgató, a tisztviselők, valamint a kirendelt szakértők;

c) az (a) és (b) pontban megjelölt személyeknek a velük egy háztartásban élő családtagjai, valamint

d) az EIT által meghívott szakértők.

2. Amennyiben az 1. bekezdésben hivatkozott személyeknek vízumra van szüksége, úgy azt a lehető leggyorsabban kell kiadni. Még mielőtt azokat a megfelelő magyar konzulátusoknál benyújtanák, az EIT köteles a vízumkérelmekről a Magyar Köztársaság Külügyminisztériumát diplomáciai csatornákon keresztül értesíteni.

3. Az Igazgató, a tisztviselők, valamint a kirendelt szakértők, továbbá az ezen személyeknek velük egy háztartásban élő családtagjai mentességet élveznek minden bevándorlási korlátozás alól.

4. A jelen Cikk nem mentesíti az EIT-t azon kötelezettség alól, hogy a jelen Cikk szerinti elbánást igénylő személyeknek az 1. bekezdésben hivatkozott valamely kategóriába tartozását megfelelő bizonyítékokkal támassza alá.

13. Cikk

Foglalkoztatás

1. Az Igazgató, a tisztviselők, valamint a kirendelt szakértők velük egy háztartásban élő családtagjai magyarországi tartózkodásuk esetén, az Igazgató, a tisztviselő, valamint a kirendelt szakértő EIT által történő alkalmazása időtartamára munkavállalási engedély nélkül léphetnek be a munkaerőpiacra.

2. Az 1. bekezdésben említett azon személyek, akik Magyarország területén keresőfoglalkozásra tesznek szert, az ilyen foglalkozás során vagy azzal összefüggésben felmerülő ügyek tekintetében nem mentesek a büntető, polgári, illetőleg közigazgatási joghatóság alól.

14. Cikk

A mentességek korlátozása

A jelen Megállapodás alapján bármely személy részére biztosított mentesség

a) nem vonatkozik a közlekedési szabálysértésekre, és

b) nem terjed ki azon harmadik fél által indított polgári eljárásokra, melyek az ilyen személy által okozott közlekedési balesetből eredő személyi sérülés vagy halál miatti kártérítésre irányulnak.

15. Cikk

A visszaélések megelőzése

1. A kiváltságok és mentességek jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései által történő biztosítása az EIT érdekében és nem az érintett egyének előnyben részesítése céljából történik. Az EIT és az e kiváltságokat és mentességeket élvező valamennyi személy kötelessége, hogy a magyar jogszabályokat minden egyéb tekintetben betartsák.

2. Az EIT köteles a megfelelő magyar hatóságokkal mindenkor együttműködni az igazságszolgáltatás megfelelő működésének elősegítése érdekében, továbbá köteles megelőzni a jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései által biztosított kiváltságokkal és mentességekkel való visszaéléseket.

3. Az EIT Igazgatója minden olyan esetben köteles lemondani a tisztviselők és a kirendelt szakértők mentességéről, amikor az adott mentesség akadályozná az igazságszolgáltatás menetét, és amikor a lemondás az EIT érdekeinek sérelme nélkül megtehető.

4. Az Igazgatótanács minden olyan esetben köteles lemondani az Igazgató mentességéről, amikor az adott mentesség fenntartása akadályozná az igazságszolgáltatás menetét, és amikor a lemondás az EIT érdekeinek sérelme nélkül megtehető.

5. Az Igazgatótanács minden olyan esetben köteles lemondani az Igazgatótanács bármely tagjának a mentességéről, amikor az adott mentesség akadályozná az igazságszolgáltatás menetét, és amikor a lemondás az EIT érdekeinek sérelme nélkül megtehető.

6. Amennyiben a Kormány úgy ítéli meg, hogy a jelen Megállapodás által biztosított valamely kiváltsággal vagy mentességgel való visszaélés történt, az EIT - ilyen irányú kérés esetén - köteles egyeztetni a megfelelő magyar hatóságokkal annak megállapítása érdekében, hogy történt-e ilyen visszaélés.

16. Cikk

Kinevezések bejelentése, személyi igazolványok

1. Az EIT köteles a Magyar Köztársaság Külügyminisztériumát tájékoztatni, amennyiben az Igazgató, egy tisztviselő, vagy egy kirendelt szakértő hivatalába lép vagy hivatalából távozik. Az EIT az Igazgató, a tisztviselők, valamint a kirendelt szakértők neveit és lakcímeit tartalmazó listát köteles minden évben a Magyar Köztársaság Külügyminisztériuma részére megküldeni.

2. Az EIT felhívására a Magyar Köztársaság Külügyminisztériuma köteles az Igazgató, a tisztviselők, a kirendelt szakértők, valamint az e személyekkel közös háztartásban élő családtagok részére - feltéve, hogy nem magyar állampolgárok vagy magyarországi állandó lakosok - az adott személy pozícióját és státuszátigazoló speciális személyazonosító igazolványt kiadni.

17. Cikk

Társadalombiztosítás

1. Az EIT az Igazgató, a tisztviselők, valamint a kirendelt szakértők, továbbá az Igazgatótanács tagjai vonatkozásában mentes a társadalombiztosítási rendszerekbe történő, mindennemű kötelező járulékfizetési kötelezettség alól.

2. Az Igazgató és a tisztviselők az Európai Unió tisztviselőire és egyéb alkalmazottaira vonatkozó szabályoknak és előírásoknak megfelelő társadalombiztosítással kell, hogy rendelkezzenek.

18. Cikk

A jogviták rendezése

1. Az EIT és a Kormány között a jelen Megállapodás alkalmazása kapcsán felmerülő valamennyi jogvitát, amikor csak lehetséges, békés úton, közvetlen tárgyalások útján kell rendezni.

2. Abban az esetben, ha valamely jogvita békés úton nem rendezhető, úgy azt az EIT, illetőleg a Kormány az Európai Unió Bírósága elé köteles vinni, ezen szándékáról azonban a másik felet az ügynek a nevezett Bíróság részére történő benyújtása előtt két hónappal köteles tájékoztatni.

19. Cikk

Magyarország felelősségének kizárása

A Magyar Köztársaság az EIT-nek a Magyarország területén végzett tevékenységeiből eredően, az EIT-nek, Igazgatójának, tisztviselőinek, kirendelt szakértőinek, illetőleg az EIT által meghívott bármely szakértőnek a tetteiért, illetőleg mulasztásaiért semmiféle nemzetközi felelősséggel nem tartozik.

20. Cikk

-----STARTING---POINT---VEGE---

Záró rendelkezések

1. A jelen Megállapodás azon dátumot követő harmincadik napon lép hatályba, amikor a Kormány és az EIT értesítik egymást azon eljárásaik befejeztéről, melyek ahhoz szükségesek, hogy a Megállapodást magukra nézve kötelezőnek ismerhessék el.

2. A Felek eltérő megállapodása hiányában, jelen Megállapodás az EIT felszámolásának lezárultáig marad hatályban.

3. A jelen Megállapodás a Felek kölcsönös egyetértésével módosítható. Ezen módosítások jelen Cikk 1. bekezdése szerint lépnek hatályba.

4. A jelen Megállapodást bármelyik Fél jogosult a másik Félhez címzett írásbeli értesítés útján felmondani. A felmondás az értesítés napjától számított hat hónap elteltével lép hatályba.

Készült két példányban Budapesten, 2010. március 23. napján.

 AZ EURÓPAI INNOVÁCIÓS ÉS TECHNOLÓGIAI INTÉZET RÉSZÉRŐL

 A MAGYAR KÖZTÁRSASÁG KORMÁNYA RÉSZÉRŐL

A MELLÉKLET

Az EIT személyzete részére nyújtandó támogatás

1. A jelen támogatás teljes értéke 20 EIT alkalmazott 5 évre szóló átlagos bérköltségét képviseli.

2. Ez a támogatás 2011-től kezdődően 1.560.000 euró öt alkalommal történő, éves megfizetésével történik, azzal, hogy az esedékesség az adott év március 31. napja.

3. Magyarország Kormánya ennek megfelelően vállalja, hogy eleget tesz az alábbi fizetési ütemezésnek:

 

 fizetendő összeg

 a megfizetett összeg EIT általi kézhezvételének határideje

 3.1

 1 560 000 euró

 2011.03.31.

 3.2

 1 560 000 euró

 2012.03.31.

 3.3

 1 560 000 euró

 2013.03.31.

 3.4

 1 560 000 euró

 2014.03.31.

 3.5

 1 560 000 euró

 2015.03.31.

B MELLÉKLET 

Az EIT állandó helyiségei

1. Elhelyezkedés: Az állandó helyiségek az Infopark Budapest E épületének 5. és 6. emeletein helyezkednek el (cím: Budapest, XI. kerület, Neumann János utca 1/E., helyrajzi szám: 4082/21). Ez a két emelet összesen bruttó 2807,3 m2 hasznos alapterülettel rendelkezik. Az állandó helyiségek hasznos bruttó alapterülete a 60 főre becsült létszámú személyzet szükségletein és az EIT tevékenységeinek megfelelő tárgyalóterem helyigényén alapul.

2. Az EIT az emelet, tárolóhelyiségek, öltözőszoba, kerékpártároló és 22 fedett parkolóhely kizárólagos használatára jogosult az 5. és 6. emelet, valamint a -1. és a -3. emeletek további területeinek csatolt tervrajzában megjelöltek szerint.

3. Az EIT a tárolóhelyiségeket kizárólagosan használhatja.

(-3. emelet, parkoló szint, 453,49 m2)

4. Az EIT az öltözőszobát és a kerékpártároló-helyiségeket kizárólagosan használhatja.

-1. emelet, parkoló szint, 44,00 m2

5. Az EIT a részére fenntartott 22 fedett parkolóhelyet kizárólagosan jogosult használni.

- 3. emelet, parkoló szint: 10 parkolóhely (parkolóhelyek sorszáma: 3-093.-3-102.),

valamint -1 emelet, parkoló szint: 12 (1 mozgáskorlátozott) parkolóhely (parkolóhelyek sorszáma: 1-001.-1-0012.)

6. A helyiségek 2009. 12. 01-jétől 2029. 12. 31-ig állnak rendelkezésre.

7. Specifikációk:

7.1. A helyiségeknek meg kell felelniük a Budapesten irányadó szokásos szabványoknak, valamint tekintettel kell lenniük az Európai Bizottság épületekre és infrastruktúrára vonatkozó politikájának azon szabályaira, melyeket a Bizottság épületekre és infrastruktúrára vonatkozó, Brüsszelben kiadott közleménye és a Brüsszeli Infrastrukturális és Logisztikai Hivatal „Szabvány épületspecifikációk kézikönyve” fektet le.

7.2. A 2 emeletet egy erre kijelölt, csupán ezt a két szintet kiszolgáló lépcsőháznak kell összekötnie. Azt, hogy csupán az EIT személyzete és ezek vendégei léphessenek be az EIT központjába egy belépőkártya-rendszerrel kell biztosítani.

7.3. A helyiségeknek meg kell felelniük a speciális szükségletekkel bíró személyek igényeinek is; különösképpen, a 2 emelet közti összeköttetés a kerekesszéket használók számára is elérhető kell, hogy legyen.

7.4. Azon 20 év időtartamára, amely alatt a Kormány az alábbi 5. pontban meghatározott költségeket fedezi, a Kormány köteles biztosítani a helyiségek teljeskörű, EIT felhasználási céljainak megfelelő működőképes állapotát. Így különösen, a Kormány a következő berendezésekért tartozik felelősséggel, ide értve ezek karbantartását, javítását és felújítását:

7.4.1. teljes mértékben üzemképes egészségügyi felszerelések és vízvezetékrendszer,

7.4.2. teljes mértékben üzemképes fűtő- és légkondicionáló berendezés,

7.4.3. teljes mértékben üzemképes, elektromos áramellátás kábelezéssel és csatlakozókkal a teljes alapterületen,

7.4.4. a teljes alapterületen egyenletesen hozzáférhető telefonos / IT rendszerekhez/hálózatokhoz kapcsolódó kábelezés és csatlakozási pontok,

7.4.5. szőnyegek, világítás, belső falak és ajtók - az EIT által a jelen megállapodáshoz kapcsolódó feljegyzésben meghatározottak szerint.

7.5. Az említett 20 éves időtartam alatt, amennyiben a helyiségek vagy azok valamely része bármilyen okból hozzáférhetetlenné válik, úgy az ilyen hozzáférhetetlenséggel érintett időre a Kormány köteles megfelelő alternatívákat biztosítani.

8. A Kormány pénzügyi támogatása: a 6. cikkben említett időtartamra az állandó helyiségeket Magyarország köteles ingyenesen, az EIT céljainak megfelelő teljes mértékben üzemképes állapotban biztosítani. Ez kizárólag az alábbi összegek megfizetését tartalmazza:

8.1. bérleti díj

8.1.1. ingatlanadók

8.1.2. az ingatlan biztosításához és a Bérbeadó felelősségbiztosításához kapcsolódó költségek

8.2. az alábbiakat tartalmazó karbantartási díj

8.2.1. ingatlan karbantartás és fenntartás

8.2.2. 24 órás portaszolgálat, biztonsági szolgáltatások és parkoló szolgáltatások

8.2.3. a belső átjárók kertészeti gondozása és fenntartása

8.2.4. a hó eltakarítása

8.2.5. a közös/megosztott területek felszínének, pl. a külső ablakoknak, közösen használt folyosóknak stb. (a napi, heti, negyedéves) takarítása 

8.2.6. a külső felszín és az ingatlan homlokzatának, frontjának takarítása

8.2.7. a megosztott területek és felszerelések (például világítás, liftek, stb.) közüzemi költségei

8.2.8. üzemeltetési és felújítási költségek, úgy mint karbantartás, kijavítások és a felszíni burkolatok, szerkezeti elemek, valamint az épület mechanikai és elektromos rendszereinek cseréje

8.2.9. az ingatlan karbantartásának és fenntartásának karbantartási díjai, a hatósági ellenőrzések során kiszabott büntetések

8.2.10. tűzvédelmi képzések, tűzbiztonsági berendezések

8.2.11. rovar- és rágcsálóirtás

8.2.12. (szokásos mennyiségű) szemét elszállítása

9. Az említett 20 éves időtartam elteltét követően, amikor a Kormány a helyiségek fenntartásának támogatását befejezi, ettől az időponttól kezdve az EIT kell, hogy gondoskodjon az érintett helyiségek biztosítására vonatkozó megfelelő eljárásról. A Kormány ebben a tekintetben köteles az EIT részére a legnagyobb mértékű segítséget megadni.

10. Az épület tulajdonosával fennálló szerződés módosítását és meghosszabbítását a Kormány az EIT-tel egyeztetve köteles lefolytatni.

11. Amennyiben az állandó helyiségek 2009. 12. 01-jén nem elérhetők, vagy ezt követően válnak bármilyen okból nem elérhetővé, úgy a Kormány köteles azonos körülmények mellett ideiglenes létesítményeket biztosítani. A helyiségeknek meg kell felelniük a Budapesten irányadó szokásos szabványoknak, valamint tekintettel kell lenniük az Európai Bizottság épületekre és infrastruktúrára vonatkozó politikájának azon szabályaira, melyeket a Bizottság épületekre és infrastruktúrára vonatkozó, Brüsszelben kiadott közleménye és a Brüsszeli Infrastrukturális és Logisztikai Hivatal „Szabvány épületspecifikációk kézikönyve” fektet le.

12. Az EIT az alábbi költségek viselésére köteles:

12.1. Az EIT egyéni mérőórákkal mért (víz- és áram-) fogyasztása.

12.2. Az EIT kizárólagos használatában álló területek takarítása.

12.3. Az EIT kizárólagos használatában álló műszaki berendezések és felszerelések, például telefonkészülékek, személyi számítógépek, egyéb IT berendezések, az EIT kizárólagos használatában álló térben elhelyezett CCTV berendezés beszerzésének, telepítésének és üzemeltetésének költségei azzal, hogy ez utóbbiból 7 kamerát a Kormány biztosít, és az ezen felüli, további kamerákat az EIT-nek kell kifizetnie.

12.4. Minden egyéb munkaeszköz, mint például a bútorzat, irodai berendezések stb.

12.5. A létesítménygazdálkodás költségei.

 ”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) E törvény 2-3. §-a Székhely-megállapodás 20. cikk 1. bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Székhely-megállapodás, illetve e törvény 2-3. §-a hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter annak ismertté válását követően a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett egyedi határozatával állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről a kutatás-fejlesztésért és technológiai innovációért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.