2016. évi VII. törvény

a Magyarország Kormánya és a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet között a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szóló jogállási megállapodás kihirdetéséről

-----STARTING---POINT---ELEJE---

1. § Az Országgyűlés e törvénnyel felhatalmazást ad a Magyarország Kormánya és a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet között a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet kiváltságairól és mentességeiről szóló jogállási megállapodás (a továbbiakban: Jogállási Megállapodás) kötelező hatályának elismerésére.

2. § Az Országgyűlés a Jogállási Megállapodást e törvénnyel kihirdeti.

3. § A Jogállási Megállapodás angol nyelvű hiteles szövege és annak hivatalos magyar nyelvű fordítása a következő:

„AGREEMENT BETWEEN HUNGARY AND THE GLOBAL GREEN GROWTH INSTITUTE REGARDING THE LEGAL STATUS AND PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF THE GLOBAL GREEN GROWTH INSTITUTE

Agreement between Hungary and the Global Green Growth Institute regarding the legal status and privileges and immunities of the Global Green Growth Institute

WHEREAS the Global Green Growth Institute („GGGI”) was established as an international organization by the Agreement on the Establishment of the Global Green Growth Institute (the „Establishment Agreement”) at Rio de Janeiro on 20 June 2012;

WHEREAS the Establishment Agreement entered into force on 18 October 2012;

WHEREAS GGGI’s primary objective is to promote sustainable development of developing and emerging countries, including the least developed countries;

WHEREAS Hungary has acceded to the Establishment Agreement and is a member country of GGGI;

WHEREAS in accordance with Article 15 of the Establishment Agreement, GGGI may seek privileges and immunities in its member states, as may be necessary and appropriate for the proper functioning of GGGI, in due consideration of such privileges and immunities as are customarily accorded to similar types of international organization, and such privileges and immunities may be specified in separate agreements concluded between GGGI and individual member countries;

WHEREAS Hungary and GGGI desire to ensure that GGGI possesses the legal status and privileges and immunities to operate within its territory and internationally and to efficiently and properly exercise its functions, including in respect of its governing organs, its staff and experts, and other persons associated with the organization;

NOW THEREFORE the parties to this Agreement hereby agree as follows:

Article 1

Definitions

Whenever used in this Agreement, the following terms have the following meanings:

„Agreement” shall mean this Agreement between Hungary and GGGI;

„Advisory Committee” shall mean the Advisory Committee of GGGI;

„appropriate authorities” shall mean such authorities in Hungary as may be appropriate in the context and in accordance with the laws and customs applicable in Hungary;

„archives of GGGI” shall mean all archives of GGGI, and includes all records, correspondence, documents, manuscripts, moving pictures, films, sound recordings and other materials belonging to GGGI, or held by or on behalf of GGGI;

„Assembly” shall mean the Assembly of GGGI; „Council” shall mean the Council of GGGI;

„dependent children” shall mean children of Personnel of GGGI who are unmarried and under the age of 21 years old; or unmarried children between the ages of 21 and 23 years old who are undertaking full-time studies or who are disabled;

„Director-General” shall mean the Director-General of GGGI appointed by the Assembly;

„Expert” shall mean any expert providing short-term or temporary services to GGGI under contractual arrangements between the expert and GGGI or between an entity and GGGI;

„Government” shall mean the Government of the Hungary;

„laws of Hungary” shall mean the constitution and laws of Hungary and includes, without limitation, statutes, decrees, ordinances, rules, regulations, orders and other instruments issued by or under the authority of the Government and its agencies;

„meetings convened by GGGI” shall mean meetings of GGGI, including any international conference or other gathering convened by GGGI, and any commission, committee or sub-group of any of such meetings;

„members of household staff” shall mean persons, other than nationals or permanent residents of Hungary, employed in the domestic staff of Personnel of GGGI;

„Office” shall mean an office of GGGI in Hungary, as further elaborated in Article 11 hereof;

„Officials of GGGI” shall mean the Director-General and all persons appointed or recruited to work full time or part time for GGGI, but does not include Experts;

„Personnel of GGGI” shall mean all members of the Assembly, the Council and the Advisory Committee, Officials of GGGI (both expatriates and nationals or permanent residents of Hungary) and Experts, but not locally recruited persons paid at an hourly rate.

„property of GGGI” shall mean all property and assets of GGGI, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held and includes funds, income and rights belonging to, or held or administered by, GGGI; and

„spouse” shall mean a partner (of whatever sex) of GGGI Personnel if they have registered their relationship, or who continuously share a household if such relationship is recognized by the Government.

Article 2

Legal Personality and Capacities

(1) The Government recognizes that GGGI is an international organization with international legal personality.

(2) GGGI shall be accorded with juridical personality and the legal capacity (i) to contract, (ii) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property and (iii) to institute legal proceedings.

(3) GGGI shall have the independence and freedom of action belonging to an international organization.

Article 3

Property, Funds and Assets

(1) GGGI and its property and assets, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process, except in so far as in a particular case it has expressly waived its immunity. It is, however, understood that no waiver of immunity shall extend to any measure of execution, unless explicitly stated otherwise.

(2) The property and assets of GGGI, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of interference, whether by executive, administrative, judicial or legislative action.

(3) The archives of GGGI shall be inviolable, wherever located.

(4) Without being restricted by financial controls, regulations or moratoria of any kind, GGGI may hold funds or currency of any kind; operate accounts in any currency; and freely transfer any currencies it holds from one country to another and freely convert any currency held by it into any other currency.

Article 4

Exemption from Taxation and Customs Duties

(1) GGGI, its assets, income, and other property shall be:

(a) exempt from all direct taxes except those which are, in fact, no more than charges for specific services rendered;

(b) exempt from prohibitions and restrictions on imports and exports in respect of articles imported or exported by GGGI for its official use and in the case of any publications of GGGI imported or exported by it; it is understood, however, that articles imported under such exemption will not be sold in the territory of the Hungary except under conditions agreed to with the Government, in light of the customs legislation in force;

(c) exempt from customs duties on the importation of goods imported by or on behalf of GGGI for its official use, or on the importation of any publications of the organisation imported by it or on its behalf, subject to compliance with such conditions as the Government may prescribe, in light of the customs legislation in force; and

(2) GGGI shall have relief, under arrangements made by the Government, by way of refund of value added tax paid on the supply of any goods and services of substantial value which are necessary for the official activities of the organization, such relief to be subject to compliance with such conditions as may be imposed by the Government in accordance with the arrangements.

Article 5

Communications

(1) Official communications of GGGI shall be accorded by Hungary treatment not less favorable than that accorded by the Government to any other international organization or government including any of the diplomatic missions based in the country, in the matter of priorities, rates and surcharges on emails, surface mail, cables, telegrams, telexes, radiograms, telefax, telephone and other means of communications, and press rates for information to the press and radio.

(2) All communications to, from and through the territory of Hungary by whatever means or in whatever form transmitted shall be immune from censorship and any other form of interception or interference with their privacy. This does not preclude the adoption of appropriate security precautions to be determined after consultation between the Government and GGGI.

(3) GGGI shall have the right in Hungary to use codes and to dispatch and receive correspondence and other communications either by courier or in sealed bags which shall have immunities and privileges not less favorable than those accorded to diplomatic couriers and bags. The bags must bear visibly GGGI emblems and shall contain only documents or articles intended for official use, and the courier shall be provided with a courier certificate issued by GGGI.

Article 6

Freedom of Assembly, Meetings and Conferences

(1) In consultation with the Government, GGGI shall have the right to convene meetings in Hungary.

(2) GGGI and its personnel shall enjoy full freedom of meeting, discussion and decision. The Government shall take all necessary measures to ensure that no impediment is placed in the way of meetings convened by GGGI within Hungary.

(3) All persons invited and accredited for a meeting or conference organized by GGGI, shall have the right of entry into and exit from Hungary, and no impediment shall be imposed on their transit to, and from, the premises of the meeting or conference. They shall be granted facilities for speedy travel. Visas and entry permits, where required, shall be granted free of charge as speedily as possible in accordance with applicable law.

Article 7

Flag, Emblem and Markings

GGGI shall have the right to display its flag and/or other identifiers on its premises and vehicles.

Article 8

Privileges and Immunities of Representatives of GGGI Members and Other Persons Constituting the Assembly, Council, and Advisory Committee of GGGI

(1) Representatives of GGGI Members and other persons constituting the Assembly, Council, and Advisory Committee shall, while exercising their functions and during their journeys to and from the place of meetings convened by GGGI, enjoy the following privileges and immunities:

(a) immunity from personal arrest or detention and immunity from legal process in respect of words spoken or written and all acts done by them in their official capacity (this immunity from legal process shall not apply to the above persons in the case of motor traffic offences committed by them or in the case of damage caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by them);

(b) the like exemption and privileges in respect of their personal baggage in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations;

(c) immunity, together with their spouses and dependent children, from immigration restrictions and alien registration requirements;

(d) the same facilities in respect of currency and exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign Governments on temporary official missions; and

(e) where persons constituting the Assembly, Council, and Advisory Committee are required to travel to attend GGGI meetings then all applications for visas made by GGGI shall be dealt with by Hungary as speedily as possible.

(2) In order to secure for the representatives of GGGI Members and other persons constituting the Assembly, Council, and Advisory Committee at GGGI meetings a complete freedom of speech and complete independence in the discharge of their duties, the immunity from legal process in respect of words spoken or written and all acts done by them in the discharge of their official duties shall continue to be accorded, notwithstanding that the persons concerned are no longer engaged in the discharge of such duties.

(3) The provisions of Article 8 (1)-(2) are not applicable in relation to representatives of Hungary.

(4) GGGI shall regularly make known to the Government the names of the officials to whom the provisions of this Article apply.

Article 9

Privileges and Immunities of Officials of GGGI

(1) Officials of GGGI shall:

(a) be immune from personal arrest or detention and from legal process of every kind in respect of words spoken or written and all acts done by them in their official capacity, which shall continue to apply after they are no longer Officials of GGGI (this immunity from legal process shall not apply to the above persons in the case of motor traffic offences committed by them or in the case of damage caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by them);

(b) be exempt from all forms of taxation on or in respect of salaries, allowances, and emoluments paid to them by GGGI;

(c) be immune, together with their spouses and dependent children, from immigration restrictions and alien registration;

(d) be accorded the same privileges in respect of exchange facilities as are accorded to officials of comparable rank of diplomatic missions;

(e) be given, together with their spouses and dependent children, the same repatriation facilities in time of international crises as officials of comparable rank of diplomatic missions;

(f) in light of the customs legislation in force, have the right to import free of duty their furniture, household goods, and effects at the time of first taking up their official post in the Office in Hungary; and

(g) in light of the customs legislation in force, have the right to import free of duty a vehicle for their personal use at the time of taking up their official post in the Office in Hungary, subject to compliance with such conditions as the Government may prescribe.

(h) Articles 9 (1) (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) do not apply to Officials of GGGI who are nationals or permanent residents of Hungary and are assigned to the Office in Hungary.

(2) The Officials of GGGI shall be exempt from national service obligations, provided that, in relation to Officials that are nationals or permanent residents of Hungary, such exemption shall be confined to Officials of GGGI whose names have, by reason of their duties, been placed upon a list compiled by the Director-General of GGGI and approved by the Government. Should other Officials of GGGI be called up for national service, the Government shall, at the request of GGGI, grant such temporary deferments in the call-up of such Officials as may be necessary to avoid interruption in the continuation of essential work.

(3) In addition to the immunities and privileges specified in Articles 9 (1) to (2) the Director-General, the Deputy Director-Generals, and the Assistant Director-Generals of GGGI shall be accorded in respect of themselves, their spouses and dependent children, the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilities accorded to diplomatic envoys, in accordance with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations (1961).

(4) GGGI shall co-operate with the appropriate authorities of the Government to facilitate the proper administration of justice and prevent the occurrence of any abuses in connection with the privileges, immunities, and facilities mentioned in this Article.

(5) The privileges and immunities contained in this Article shall also apply to persons employed and seconded by a Member, organization, or other entity to GGGI.

Article 10

Privileges and Immunities of Experts

Experts for GGGI shall be accorded the following privileges and immunities as are necessary for the effective exercise of their functions, including during journeys made in connection with their service:

(a) immunity from personal arrest or detention and immunity from legal process in respect of words spoken or written or acts done by them in the performance of their official functions, such immunity to continue notwithstanding that the persons concerned are no longer under contractual arrangement with GGGI (this immunity from legal process shall not apply to the above persons in the case of motor traffic offences committed by them or in the case of damage caused by a motor vehicle belonging to or driven by them);

(b) the same facilities in respect of currency and exchange restrictions as are accorded to representatives of foreign Governments on temporary official missions; and

(c) immunity, together with their spouses and dependent children, from immigration restrictions and alien registration.

Article 11

Office Premises

(1) With the agreement of the Government, GGGI may establish an office in Hungary (the „Office”).

(2) The Office shall be staffed with such GGGI personnel as may be assigned thereto.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the laws of Hungary shall apply within the Office, and the courts of Hungary shall have jurisdiction over acts done in the Office.

(4) The Office premises shall be inviolable and shall be under the control and authority of GGGI. No authorities of Hungary shall enter the Office premises to perform any duties therein without the consent of, and under conditions agreed to by GGGI. GGGI and the Government shall agree under what circumstances and in what manner the authorities of Hungary may enter the Office premises without prior consent of GGGI in connection with fire prevention, sanitary regulations or emergencies.

(5) GGGI shall have the right to install and operate in Hungary point-to-point telecommunication facilities and other communication and transmission facilities as may be necessary to facilitate communications with the Office both from within and outside Hungary.

(6) GGGI shall have the power to make rules and regulations operative within the Office premises for the full and independent exercise of its operations and performance of its functions.

(7) GGGI shall have the right to convene meetings within the Office premises.

(8) The Office premises shall be used in a manner compatible with GGGI’s purposes and functions. GGGI shall prevent the Office premises form becoming a refuge for fugitives from justice, or for persons subject to extradition, or persons avoiding service of legal process or a judicial proceeding.

(9) The appropriate authorities of Hungary shall exercise due diligence to ensure that the tranquility of the Office premises is not disturbed by any person attempting unauthorized entry or creating disturbances in the immediate vicinity of the Office premises.

(10) If so requested by GGGI, the appropriate authorities of Hungary shall provide a sufficient number of police for the preservation of law and order in the Office premises and for the removal therefrom of offenders.

Article 12

Transit and Residence

(1) The Government shall take all measures required to facilitate the entry into, departure from and freedom of movement in Hungary, and, with regard to persons assigned to the Office, residence in Hungary, of the following persons without any restriction and irrespective of nationality:

(a) Representatives of GGGI members and other persons constituting the Assembly, the Council and Advisory Committee, while exercising their functions and during their journeys to and from the place of meetings convened by GGGI;

(b) Officials of GGGI;

(c) Experts;

(d) the spouse and dependent children, and members of the household staff of Officials and Experts of GGGI assigned to the Office; and

(e) Other persons invited by GGGI on official business. GGGI shall communicate the names of such persons to the Government.

(2) The Government shall issue to its embassies, legations, consulates and any other offices representing the interests of Hungary general instructions to grant, if necessary and in accordance with relevant Hungarian laws and regulations, visas to any persons referred to in this Article 12 without any delay, waiting period, or payment of any charges, and without ordinarily requiring their personal presence.

Article 13

Waiver of Privileges and Immunities

(1) The privileges and immunities granted by this Agreement to persons are conferred in the interest of GGGI and not for the personal benefit of the individuals themselves. It is the duty of all persons enjoying such privileges and immunities to observe in all other respect the laws and regulations of Hungary. The following authorities have the right and the duty to waive immunities of the following persons in a particular case where, in their opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of GGGI:

(a) the Members of GGGI, with respect to their representatives on the Assembly and Council;

(b) the Assembly, with respect to the Director-General of GGGI;

(c) the Council, with respect to the experts or non-state actors who serve as members of the Council or Advisory Committee; and

(d) the Director-General of GGGI, with respect to Officials of GGGI (other than him/herself), Experts and GGGI itself.

(2) In all cases a waiver must be expressly made in writing.

Article 14

Settlement of Differences on the Interpretation or Application of the Present Agreement

(1) All differences arising out of the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall be settled by consultation, negotiation or other agreed mode of settlement.

(2) If the difference is not settled in accordance with Article 14 (1) within three months following a written request by one of the parties, then either party may request that the difference be referred for decision by an arbitral tribunal according to the procedure set forth in Article 14 (3) to (5).

(3) The arbitral tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators: one to be chosen by each party and the third, who shall be the chairman of the tribunal, to be chosen by the other two arbitrators. Should a party not have chosen its arbitrator within three months following the appointment by the other party of its arbitrator, then the second arbitrator shall be appointed by the President of the International Court of Justice. Should the first two arbitrators fail to agree upon the third within three months of the latest date on which an arbitrator was appointed, then the third arbitrator shall be appointed by the President of the International Court of Justice at the request of either party.

(4) Unless the parties otherwise agree, the arbitral tribunal shall determine its own procedure and the expenses shall be borne by the parties as assessed by the tribunal. The language to be used in the arbitral proceedings shall be English.

(5) The arbitral tribunal, which shall decide by a majority of votes, shall reach a decision on the difference on the basis of the provisions of the present Agreement and the applicable rules of international law. The decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties to the difference.

Article 15

General Provisions

(1) The provisions of this Agreement shall in no way be construed to limit or prejudice the privileges, immunities, exemptions, or various types of supports or contributions for GGGI, which have been, or may hereafter be, agreed between the Government and GGGI in any separate agreement.

(2) This Agreement shall not be construed so as to abrogate, or derogate from, any provisions of the Establishment Agreement or any rights or obligations which GGGI may otherwise have, acquire, or assume.

(3) The Government and GGGI may enter into such supplementary agreements as may be necessary within the scope of this Agreement.

Article 16

Relation of the Agreement to the other international Agreements

(1) The provisions of this Agreement shall not affect the commitments of the Government or GGGI envisaged by other bilateral or multilateral international agreements, or their membership in international organizations.

(2) This Agreement shall not affect the obligations which may arise from the membership of Hungary in the European Union, consequently the provisions of the present Agreement shall not be invoked or interpreted in such a way as to invalidate or otherwise affect the obligations of Hungary imposed by the Treaties on which the European Union is founded.

Article 17

Entry into Force and Amendment

(1) This Agreement shall be subject to ratification and shall enter into force on the thirtieth (30th) day after the receipt of the latter notification, through diplomatic channels, indicating the completion of all internal legal procedures of both parties.

(2) Consultations with a view to amending this Agreement may be held at the request of the Government or GGGI. Amendments shall be made by joint written agreement and shall enter into force according to paragraph (1) of this Article.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF Hungary and the Global Green Growth Institute, each acting through its duly authorized representative, have signed this Agreement in two equally valid originals in the English language on the respective dates indicated below.

 FOR AND ON BEHALF OF HUNGARY

 FOR AND ON BEHALF OF THE GLOBAL GREEN GROWTH INSTITUTE

 08. 12. 2015

 08. 12. 2015”

„MEGÁLLAPODÁS AMELY LÉTREJÖTT MAGYARORSZÁG ÉS A GLOBÁLIS ZÖLD NÖVEKEDÉSI INTÉZET KÖZÖTT A GLOBÁLIS ZÖLD NÖVEKEDÉSI INTÉZET JOGÁLLÁSÁRÓL, KIVÁLTSÁGAIRÓL ÉS MENTESSÉGEIRŐL

Megállapodás Magyarország és a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet között a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet jogállásáról, kiváltságairól és mentességeiről

MIVEL a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézetet (angolul: Global Green Growth Institute - a továbbiakban: GGGI) a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet létrehozásáról szóló megállapodás (a továbbiakban: létrehozásról szóló megállapodás) nemzetközi szervezetként hozta létre Rio de Janeiróban 2012. június 20-án;

MIVEL a létrehozásról szóló megállapodás 2012. október 18-án hatályba lépett;

MIVEL a GGGI elsődleges célja a fenntartható fejlődés előmozdítása a fejlődő és feltörekvő országokban - beleértve a legkevésbé fejlett országokat is;

MIVEL Magyarország csatlakozott a GGGI létrehozásról szóló Alapító Egyezményhez, valamint a GGGI tagországa; MIVEL a GGGI - a létrehozásról szóló megállapodás 15. cikkével összhangban - kérhet olyan kiváltságokat és mentességeket a tagállamaiban, amelyek szükségesek és indokoltak a GGGI rendes működéséhez - megfelelően figyelembe véve a hasonló típusú nemzetközi szervezetek számára általában biztosított kiváltságokat és mentességeket -, és az ilyen kiváltságok és mentességek a GGGI és az egyedi tagországok közötti külön megállapodásban határozhatók meg;

MIVEL Magyarország és a GGGI biztosítani kívánják azt, hogy a GGGI rendelkezzen jogállással, valamint kiváltságokkal és mentességekkel ahhoz, hogy területén és nemzetközi szinten tevékenységet végezhessen, és hogy feladatait - beleértve az irányító szerveit, személyi állományát és szakértőit, valamint a szervezettel kapcsolatban álló más személyeket illető feladatokat - hatékonyan és megfelelően láthassa el;

EZÉRT a jelen megállapodásban részes felek a következőkben állapodnak meg:

1. cikk

Fogalommeghatározások

A jelen megállapodásban való használatkor a következő kifejezések az alábbi jelentéssel bírnak:

„megállapodás” a Magyarország és a GGGI között létrejött jelen megállapodást jelenti;

„Tanácsadó Bizottság” a GGGI Tanácsadó Bizottságát jelenti;

„illetékes hatóságok” azokat a magyarországi hatóságokat jelölik, amelyek a Magyarországon alkalmazandó jog és szokások keretében és azok alapján illetékességgel rendelkeznek;

„GGGI-irattár” a GGGI teljes irattárát jelöli és magában foglal minden nyilvántartást, levelezést, dokumentumot, kéziratot, mozgóképet, filmet, hangfelvételt és egyéb, a GGGI tulajdonában álló vagy a GGGI nevében birtokolt anyagot;

„Közgyűlés” a GGGI Közgyűlését jelöli;

„Tanács” a GGGI Tanácsát jelöli;

„eltartott gyermekek” a GGGI személyi állományának azokat a gyermekeit jelöli, akik nem házasok és 21 évnél fiatalabbak; vagy a nem házas és 21 és 23 éves kor közötti nappali tagozatos tanuló vagy fogyatékkal élő gyermekeket;

„főigazgató” a GGGI-nek a Közgyűlés által kinevezett főigazgatóját jelöli;

„szakértők” azokat a szakértőket jelöli, akik az adott szakértő és a GGGI között vagy adott szervezet és a GGGI között létrejött szerződéses megállapodás szerint szolgáltatást nyújtanak a GGGI számára;

„Kormány” Magyarország Kormányát jelöli;

„Magyarország joga” Magyarország alaptörvényét és jogát jelenti és magában foglalja - korlátozás nélkül - a törvényeket, rendeleteket, határozatokat, utasításokat, szabályokat, szabályozásokat, és a Kormány vagy hivatalai által kiadott vagy felügyeletébe tartozó jogi aktusokat;

„GGGI által összehívott találkozó” a GGGI találkozóit jelenti, beleértve minden nemzetközi konferenciát vagy a GGGI által összehívott egyéb gyűlést, továbbá az ilyen találkozók bizottságait, albizottságait vagy alcsoportjait;

„háztartási személyzet tagjai” azokat a nem magyar állampolgárságú, vagy magyarországi letelepedési engedéllyel rendelkező személyeket jelöli, akiket a GGGI személyi állományának háztartási alkalmazottaiként foglalkoztatnak.

„iroda” a GGGI magyarországi irodáját jelenti, a 11. cikkben részletesebben kifejtettek szerint;

„GGGI tisztviselői” a főigazgatót és a GGGI által alkalmazott valamennyi személyt jelöli;

„GGGI személyi állománya” a Közgyűlés, a Tanács és a Tanácsadó Bizottság valamennyi tagját, és a GGGI tisztviselőit (külföldi és magyar állampolgárságú vagy magyarországi letelepedési engedéllyel rendelkező személyeket egyaránt), valamint a szakértőket jelöli, a helyben, óradíjban fizetett személyek kivételével.

„GGGI vagyona” a GGGI teljes vagyonát és eszközállományát jelöli - elhelyezkedésre és birtokosra való tekintet nélkül - és magában foglalja a pénzeszközöket, jövedelmeket, valamint a GGGI tulajdonát képező, általa birtokolt vagy kezelt jogokat; és

„házastárs” a GGGI személyi állományába tartozó személy partnerét jelöli (nemre tekintet nélkül), amennyiben kapcsolatukat nyilvántartásba vetették, vagy azt a személyt, akivel háztartását folyamatosan megosztja - amennyiben a Kormány az ilyen jellegű kapcsolatot elismeri.

2. cikk

Jogi személyiség és jogképesség

(1) A Kormány elismeri, hogy a GGGI egy nemzetközi jogi személyiséggel rendelkező nemzetközi szervezet.

(2) A GGGI-t jogi személyiség valamint i. szerződéskötés, ii. ingó és ingatlan vagyon szerzése és elidegenítése és iii. jogi eljárás indítása vonatkozásában jogképesség illeti meg.

(3) A GGGI rendelkezik a nemzetközi szervezeteket megillető függetlenséggel és cselekvési szabadsággal.

3. cikk

Vagyon, pénzeszközök és eszközök

(1) A GGGI, továbbá - fellelési helytől és birtokostól függetlenül - vagyona és eszközei mentességet élveznek a jogi eljárások minden formájától, kivéve akkor, ha egyedi esetben kifejezetten lemond a mentességről. Ez azonban úgy értendő, hogy egyértelmű eltérő nyilatkozat hiányában a mentességfeladás nem terjed ki minden végrehajtási intézkedésre.

(2) A GGGI vagyona és eszközei - fellelési helytől és birtokostól függetlenül - mentesülnek a házkutatás, igénybevétel, elkobzás, kisajátítás vagy a beavatkozás bármilyen más formája alól, legyen az akár végrehajtási, közigazgatási, bírósági vagy jogi aktus.

(3) A GGGI irattára - bárhol is helyezkedjen el - sérthetetlen.

(4) A GGGI - pénzügyi ellenőrzések, előírások vagy moratórium általi korlátozás nélkül - tarthat bármilyen pénzeszközt vagy devizát/valutát; vezethet számlákat bármilyen pénznemben; és az általa tartott devizából/valutából szabadon utalhat egyik országból a másikba, továbbá az általa tartott devizából/valutából szabadon válthat át bármilyen másik pénznemre.

4. cikk

Adó- és vámmentesség

(1) A GGGI, annak eszközei, jövedelmei és egyéb vagyona:

(a) mentesülnek valamennyi közvetlen adó alól, kivéve azokat, amelyek valójában nem különböznek az egyedileg nyújtott szolgáltatásokért felszámított díjaktól;

(b) mentességet élveznek a behozatali és kiviteli tilalmak és korlátozások alól a GGGI által hivatalos használatra behozott és kivitt árucikkek tekintetében, valamint a GGGI által behozott vagy kivitt bármely kiadvány esetében; ez azonban úgy értendő, hogy az ilyen mentességgel behozott cikkek nem értékesíthetők Magyarország területén, kivéve ha ez a Kormánnyal egyeztetett feltételek mellett történik, a hatályos vámjogszabályok előírásaira tekintettel;

(c) a Kormány által előírt feltételek betartása mellett mentességet élveznek a GGGI által vagy nevében hivatalos használatra behozott javak behozatalára, vagy az általa vagy nevében a szervezet bármely kiadványának behozatalára kivetett vámok alól, a hatályos vámjogszabályok előírásaira tekintettel.

(2) A Kormány által alkotott szabályok szerint a GGGI adókedvezményt élvez a szervezet hivatali tevékenységéhez szükséges jelentős értékű termékek és szolgáltatások után megfizetett általános forgalmi adó visszatérítésének formájában, úgy, hogy az ilyen kedvezményre a Kormány által a szabályokkal összhangban meghatározott feltételek betartása mellett van lehetőség.

5. cikk

Közlemények

(1) Az e-mailek, postai küldemények, táviratok, telegramok, telexek, rádiótáviratok, faxüzenetek, telefonhívások és egyéb kommunikációs eszközök prioritásai, díjai és pótdíjai vonatkozásában a GGGI hivatalos közleményeit Magyarország nem részesíti kedvezőtlenebb elbánásban, mint ahogyan a Kormány bármely más nemzetközi szervezet vagy kormány esetében eljár, beleértve az országban található bármelyik diplomáciai képviseletet.

(2) A Magyarország területére érkező, onnan származó és azon keresztülmenő bármilyen eszközzel vagy bármilyen formában továbbított minden kommunikáció mentesül a cenzúrától és a feltartóztatástól vagy a titkosságába való beavatkozástól. Ez nem zárja ki a Kormány és a GGGI közötti egyeztetést követően meghatározandó megfelelő biztonsági óvintézkedések elfogadását.

(3) A GGGI-nek Magyarországon joga van a kódok alkalmazására, valamint arra, hogy levelezését és egyéb kommunikációját futár révén vagy lezárt csomagban küldhesse el és fogadhassa, az ezeket megillető mentességek és kiváltságok nem lehetnek kedvezőtlenebbek, mint amelyek a diplomáciai futárokat és táskákat megilletik. A táskákon láthatóan fel kell tüntetni a GGGI emblémáját és kizárólag hivatalos használatra szánt dokumentumokat és cikkeket tartalmazhatnak, a futárnak pedig rendelkeznie kell egy GGGI által kibocsátott futárigazolvánnyal.

6. cikk

Gyülekezés, találkozók és konferenciák szabadsága

(1) A Kormánnyal egyeztetve a GGGI-nek joga van Magyarországon találkozókat tartani.

(2) A GGGI-t és annak személyzetét teljes szabadság illeti meg a találkozók, a viták és a döntéshozatal tekintetében. A Kormány minden szükséges intézkedést megtesz annak biztosítására, hogy a GGGI által Magyarországon összehívott találkozóknak ne legyen semmilyen jogi akadálya.

(3) A GGGI által szervezett találkozóra vagy konferenciára meghívott és a részvételre felhatalmazott személyeknek joga van Magyarországra belépni és onnan kilépni, továbbá a találkozó vagy konferencia helyszínére utazásuk és visszautazásuk jogilag nem akadályoztatható. Megkapják a gyors utazáshoz szükséges eszközöket. Az adott esetben szükséges vízumok és belépési engedélyek kiadására az alkalmazandó joggal összhangban térítésmentesen és a lehető leggyorsabban sor kerül.

7. cikk

Lobogó, embléma és jelölések

A GGGI jogosult ingatlanjain és járművein megjeleníteni lobogóját és/vagy egyéb azonosító jeleit.

8. cikk

A GGGI-tagok képviselőinek és a GGGI Közgyűlését, Tanácsát és Tanácsadó Bizottságát adó egyéb személyek kiváltságai és mentességei

(1) A GGGI-tagok képviselőit valamint a Közgyűlést, a Tanácsot és a Tanácsadó Bizottságot adó egyéb személyeket - feladataik ellátásakor és a GGGI által összehívott találkozók helyszínére való utazásuk és visszautazásuk közben a következő kiváltságok és mentességek illetik meg:

(a) mentesség a személyes letartóztatás és fogva tartás, valamint a szóbeli vagy írásbeli kijelentések, továbbá hivatalos minőségükben elkövetett cselekedeteik miatti jogi eljárások alól (a jogi eljárástól való ezen mentesség nem vonatkozik a fenti személyekre abban az esetben, amikor közlekedési szabálysértést követnek el vagy amikor a saját vagy általuk vezetett gépjármű kárt okoz);

(b) hasonló mentesség és kiváltság a személyes poggyász tekintetében, összhangban a diplomáciai kapcsolatokról szóló Bécsi Egyezmény 36. cikk 2. bekezdésével;

(c) mentesség - házastársukkal és eltartott gyermekeikkel együtt - a bevándorlási korlátozások és a külföldiek nyilvántartásba vételére vonatkozó követelmények alól;

(d) a devizára/valutára és a pénzváltásra vonatkozó korlátozások tekintetében ugyanazok a kedvezmények, mint amelyek a külföldi kormányok képviselőit is megilletik ideiglenes hivatalos kiküldetéseik során; és

(e) amikor a Közgyűlést, a Tanácsot és a Tanácsadó Bizottságot adó személyeknek GGGI-találkozókra kell utazniuk, akkor Magyarország a lehető leggyorsabban feldolgozza a GGGI által benyújtott valamennyi vízumkérelmet.

(2) Annak érdekében, hogy a GGGI-tagok és a Közgyűlést, a Tanácsot és a Tanácsadó Bizottságot adó egyéb személyek számára a GGGI-találkozókon biztosítva legyen a teljes szólásszabadság és a teljes függetlenség feladataik ellátásában, a szóbeli vagy írásbeli kijelentésekre és hivatali feladatuk teljesítése során az általuk végrehajtott valamennyi cselekedetre vonatkozó, a jogi eljárás alóli mentesség a későbbiekben is megilleti őket tekintet nélkül arra, hogy részt vesznek-e az ilyen feladatok teljesítésében.

(3) A 8. cikk (1)-(2) bekezdéseinek rendelkezései Magyarország képviselői tekintetében nem alkalmazandók.

(4) A GGGI rendszeresen tudatja a Kormánnyal azoknak a tisztviselőknek a nevét, akikre alkalmazandók a jelen cikk rendelkezései.

9. cikk

A GGGI tisztviselőinek kiváltságai és mentességei

(1) A GGGI tisztviselői:

(a) mentesülnek a személyes letartóztatás és fogva tartás, valamint a szóbeli vagy írásbeli kijelentések, továbbá hivatalos minőségükben elkövetett cselekedetek miatti bármiféle jogi eljárások alól, és ez GGGI-tisztviselői státuszuk megszűnése után is megilleti őket (a jogi eljárástól való ezen mentesség nem vonatkozik a fenti személyekre abban az esetben, amikor közlekedési szabálysértést követnek el, vagy amikor a saját vagy általuk vezetett gépjármű kárt okoz);

(b) a GGGI által számukra fizetett bérek, juttatások és járandóságok tekintetében mentesülnek az adózás valamennyi formája alól;

(c) mentesülnek - házastársukkal és eltartott gyermekeikkel együtt - a bevándorlási korlátozások és a külföldiek nyilvántartásba vétele alól;

(d) devizajogi kedvezmények tekintetében ugyanazokban a kiváltságokban részesülnek, mint a diplomáciai képviseletek hasonló rangú tisztviselői;

(e) nemzetközi válságok idején ugyanazokban a hazatérési kedvezményekben részesülnek - házastársukkal és eltartott gyermekeikkel együtt - mint a diplomáciai képviseletek hasonló rangú tisztviselői;

(f) a hatályos vámjogszabályok előírásaira tekintettel jogosultak bútoraikat, háztartási javaikat és személyes vagyontárgyaikat vámmentesen behozni, amikor a magyarországi irodában első alkalommal foglalják el hivatalukat; és

(g) a hatályos vámjogszabályok előírásaira tekintettel jogosultak egy darab járművet személyes használatra behozni, amikor a magyarországi irodában első alkalommal foglalják el hivatalukat - a Kormány által előírt feltételek betartása mellett.

(h) a 9. cikk (1) bekezdés c), d), e), f) és g) pontjai nem alkalmazhatók a GGGI-nek azon tisztviselőire, akik magyar állampolgárok vagy állandó magyarországi lakóhellyel rendelkeznek és a magyarországi Irodába jelölték ki őket.

(2) A GGGI tisztviselői mentesülnek a honvédelmi kötelezettség alól, azzal a feltétellel, hogy - a magyar állampolgárságú vagy állandó magyarországi lakóhellyel rendelkező tisztviselők tekintetében - ez a mentesség a GGGI-nek azokra a tisztviselőire korlátozódik, akiknek a neve - feladataik miatt - felkerült a GGGI főigazgatója által összeállított és a Kormány által jóváhagyott listára. Amennyiben a GGGI egyéb tisztviselőit honvédelmi szolgálatra hívják be, úgy a Kormány - a GGGI kérésére - engedélyezi e tisztviselők behívásának ideiglenes halasztását, amennyiben ez az érdemi munkavégzés fennakadásának elkerülése érdekében szükséges.

(3) A 9. cikk (1)-(2) bekezdéseiben meghatározott kiváltságokon és mentességeken túlmenően a GGGI főigazgatóját, a helyettes főigazgatóit és a főigazgató-helyetteseit saját magukra, házastársukra és eltartott gyermekeikre nézve megilletik a diplomáciai küldöttségeket a diplomáciai kapcsolatokról szóló Bécsi Egyezménnyel összhangban megillető kiváltságok és mentességek, kivételek és kedvezmények.

(4) A GGGI együttműködik a Kormány illetékes hatóságaival az igazságszolgáltatás megfelelő működésének elősegítése, valamint az e cikkben említett kiváltságokkal, mentességekkel és kedvezményekkel kapcsolatos visszaélések megelőzése érdekében.

(5) Az e cikkben foglalt kiváltságok és mentességek a GGGI adott tagja, szervezete vagy más egysége által foglalkoztatott és kirendelt személyekre is vonatkoznak.

10. cikk

Szakértők kiváltságai és mentességei

A GGGI szakértőit a feladataik hatékony ellátásához szükség szerint a következő kiváltságok és mentességek illetik meg, beleértve a szolgálatukkal kapcsolatos utazásaik során is:

(a) mentesség a személyes letartóztatás és fogva tartás, valamint a szóbeli vagy írásbeli kijelentések, vagy hivatali feladataik teljesítése során elkövetett cselekedeteik miatti jogi eljárások alól, ez a mentesség a későbbiekben is megilleti őket tekintet nélkül arra, hogy az érintett személyeknek a GGGI-vel fennálló szerződéses kapcsolata megszűnt-e (a jogi eljárástól való ezen mentesség nem vonatkozik a fenti személyekre abban az esetben, amikor közlekedési szabálysértést követnek el vagy amikor a saját vagy általuk vezetett gépjármű kárt okoz);

(b) a devizára/valutára és a pénzváltásra vonatkozó korlátozások tekintetében ugyanazok a kedvezmények, mint amelyek a külföldi kormányok képviselőit is megilletik ideiglenes hivatalos kiküldetéseik során; és

(c) mentesség - házastársukkal és eltartott gyermekeikkel együtt - a bevándorlási korlátozások és a külföldiek nyilvántartásba vétele alól.

11. cikk

Az iroda helyiségei

(1) A GGGI - a Kormány beleegyezésével - irodát hozhat létre Magyarországon (a továbbiakban: „iroda”).

(2) Az iroda személyzetét oda kirendelhető GGGI-személyzet adja.

(3) A jelen megállapodás eltérő rendelkezése hiányában az irodán belül Magyarország joga alkalmazandó és az irodában elkövetett cselekedetek tekintetében Magyarország bíróságai rendelkeznek joghatósággal.

(4) Az iroda helyiségei sérthetetlenek, felettük a GGGI látja el a felügyeletet és az ellenőrzést. A GGGI beleegyezése és általa jóváhagyott feltételek hiányában magyarországi hatóság kötelességei teljesítésének céljával nem léphet be az iroda helyiségeibe. A GGGI és a Kormány megállapodnak abban, hogy tűzvédelemmel, közegészségügyi rendelkezésekkel és veszélyhelyzettel kapcsolatosan mely körülmények mellett és milyen módon léphetnek be a magyar hatóságok az irodába a GGGI előzetes beleegyezése nélkül.

(5) A GGGI-nek joga van az irodával a mind Magyarországon belülről, mind kívülről folytatott kommunikáció támogatásához szükséges pont-pont telekommunikációs létesítményeket, valamint egyéb kommunikációs és átviteli eszközöket Magyarországon telepíteni és azokat működtetni.

(6) A GGGI-nek joga van arra, hogy a tevékenységeinek teljes körű és független végzéséhez és feladatainak teljesítéséhez az iroda helyiségein belül hatályos szabályokat és előírásokat vezessen be.

(7) A GGGI-nek joga van találkozókat összehívni az iroda helyiségeiben.

(8) Az iroda helyiségeit a GGGI céljaival és feladataival összeegyeztethető módon használják. A GGGI megelőzi, hogy az iroda helyiségei az igazságszolgáltatás elől menekülők, a kiadatási eljárás alá vont személyek, a jogi kézbesítést vagy bírósági eljárást elkerülők menedékévé váljon.

(9) Magyarország illetékes hatóságai kellő körültekintéssel gondoskodnak arról, hogy az iroda helyiségeinek nyugalmát ne zavarják meg illetéktelen behatolást megkísérlő vagy az iroda helyiségeinek közvetlen közelében zavaró tevékenységet folytató személyek.

(10) Amennyiben azt a GGGI kéri, úgy a magyarországi illetékes hatóságok biztosítják a törvénynek és a rendnek az iroda helyiségein belüli fenntartásához és a szabálysértők eltávolításához szükséges elegendő számú rendőrt.

12. cikk

Átutazás és tartózkodás

(1) A Kormány minden szükséges intézkedést megtesz a Magyarországra való belépés, az onnan való kilépés és az országon belüli mozgás szabadságának, valamint - az irodába rendelt személyek tekintetében - a következő személyek Magyarországon való tartózkodásának elősegítése érdekében, bármiféle korlátozás és állampolgárságra való tekintet nélkül:

a) A GGGI-tagok képviselői valamint a Közgyűlést, a Tanácsot és a Tanácsadó Bizottságot adó egyéb személyek, miközben feladataikat látják el és a GGGI által összehívott találkozók helyszínére utazásuk és visszautazásuk közben;

b) a GGGI tisztviselői;

c) szakértők;

d) házastárs és eltartott gyermekek, valamint a GGGI-nek az Irodához rendelt tisztviselőinek és szakértőinek háztartási személyzetének tagjai; és

e) a GGGI által hivatalos ügyben meghívott egyéb személyek. A GGGI közölni fogja e személyek neveit a Kormánnyal.

(2) A Kormány a nagykövetségeit, követségeit, konzulátusait és Magyarország egyéb érdekképviseleti hivatalait általánosan utasítja, hogy a jelen 12. cikkben említett személyek számára - szükség szerint, és a vonatkozó magyar törvényeknek és jogszabályoknak megfelelően - késlekedés, várakozási idő vagy illetékfizetés, továbbá személyes jelenlétük rendes megkövetelése nélkül állítsanak ki vízumot.

13. cikk

Kiváltságok és mentességek megszűnése

(1) Jelen megállapodás a személyek számára a GGGI érdekében biztosít kiváltságokat és mentességeket és nem az egyének személyes előnyhöz juttatása érdekében. Valamennyi ilyen kiváltságot és mentességet élvező személy köteles minden egyéb vonatkozásban betartani Magyarország törvényeit és jogszabályait. A következő hatóságoknak joga és kötelessége megszüntetni a következő személyek mentességét olyan egyedi esetben, amikor - megítélésük szerint - a mentesség akadályozná az igazságszolgáltatás menetét és a megszüntetés nem sérti a GGGI érdekeit:

(a) a Közgyűlésben és a Tanácsban lévő képviselőik tekintetében a GGGI tagjai;

(b) a GGGI főigazgatója tekintetében a Közgyűlés;

(c) a Tanács és a Tanácsadó Bizottság tagjaiként eljáró szakértők és a nem állami szereplők tekintetében a Tanács; és

(d) a GGGI tisztviselői, szakértői és a GGGI saját maga tekintetében a GGGI főigazgatója (kivéve saját magára nézve).

(2) A megszüntetést minden esetben kifejezetten írásba kell foglalni.

14. cikk

A jelen megállapodás értelmezésében vagy alkalmazásában való nézeteltérések rendezése

(1) A jelen megállapodás értelmezéséből vagy alkalmazásából fakadó valamennyi nézeteltérést egyeztetés, tárgyalás vagy a rendezés egyéb elfogadott formájában kell rendezni.

(2) Amennyiben a nézeteltérésnek a 14. cikk (1) bekezdése szerinti rendezésére nem kerül sor a felek egyikének írásos kérelmét követő három hónapon belül, úgy bármelyik fél kérheti, hogy a nézeteltérést a 14. cikk (3)-(5) bekezdéseiben meghatározott eljárás szerint terjesszék elő választottbírósági döntésre.

(3) A választottbíróság három választottbíróból áll: mindkét fél választ egy választottbírót, a harmadikat - a választottbíróság elnökét - pedig a másik két választottbíró választja. Amennyiben a felek egyike elmulasztja megválasztani a saját választottbíróját a másik fél választottbírójának kijelölését követő három hónapon belül, úgy a második választottbírót a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnöke jelöli ki. Amennyiben az első két választottbíró nem állapodik meg a harmadik személyében a kettejük közül a későbbi kijelölésének napját követő három hónapon belül, úgy a harmadik választottbírót bármelyik fél kérésére a Nemzetközi Bíróság elnöke jelöli ki.

(4) A felek eltérő megállapodásának hiányában a választottbíróság saját maga határozza meg a saját eljárását, a kiadásokat pedig a választottbíróság elbírálása szerint a felek viselik. A választottbírósági eljárások nyelve az angol.

(5) A többségi szavazással döntő választottbíróság a nézeteltérés vonatkozásában a jelen megállapodás rendelkezései valamint a nemzetközi jog alkalmazandó szabályai alapján hoz határozatot. A választottbíróság döntése a nézeteltérésben részes felekre nézve jogerős.

15. cikk

Általános rendelkezések

(1) A jelen megállapodás rendelkezései semmilyen módon nem értelmezhetők a korábban vagy a későbbiekben a Kormány és a GGGI által külön megállapodásban megállapított kiváltságok, mentességek, mentesítések vagy a GGGI-nek címzett különböző típusú támogatások és hozzájárulások korlátozásaként vagy megsértéseként.

(2) A jelen megállapodás nem értelmezhető a létrehozásról szóló megállapodás rendelkezéseinek vagy a GGGI által más módon birtokolt, szerzett vagy vállalt jogok vagy kötelezettségek hatályon kívül helyezéseként vagy azoktól való eltérésként.

(3) A Kormány és a GGGI a jelen megállapodás alkalmazási körén belül szükség esetén köthetnek ilyen kiegészítő megállapodásokat.

16. cikk

A jelen Megállapodás más nemzetközi Egyezményekhez való viszonya

(1) A jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései nem érintik a Szerződő Felek egyéb két- vagy többoldalú nemzetközi szerződésekben szereplő kötelezettségvállalásait, vagy nemzetközi szervezetekben való tagságát.

(2) A jelen Megállapodás nem befolyásolja azokat a kötelezettségeket, amelyek Magyarország európai uniós tagságából fakadnak, következésképpen jelen Megállapodás rendelkezései nem idézhetők vagy értelmezhetők úgy, mint amelyek érvénytelenítik vagy bármilyen más módon befolyásolják Magyarországnak az Európai Unió alapját képező szerződésekből származó kötelezettségeit.

17. cikk

Hatálybalépés és módosítás

(1) A jelen megállapodást ratifikálni szükséges, hatálybalépése a későbbi jegyzék diplomáciai úton történő beérkezését követő harmincadik (30.) napon esedékes, ezzel egyúttal jelezve minden szükséges belső jogi folyamat lezárultát a felek részéről.

(2) A Kormány vagy a GGGI kérésére egyeztetés folytatható a jelen megállapodás módosítására vonatkozóan. A módosítások megtétele közös írásos megegyezés alapján lehetséges, és a jelen cikk (1) bekezdése szerint léphetnek hatályba.

A FENTIEK HITELÉÜL Magyarország és a Globális Zöld Növekedési Intézet - mindketten szabályszerűen meghatalmazott képviselőiken keresztül eljárva - két azonos érvényességű angol nyelvű eredeti példányban aláírták a jelen megállapodást a lenti napokon.

 MAGYARORSZÁG KORMÁNYA NEVÉBEN ÉS MEGBÍZÁSÁBÓL

 GLOBÁLIS ZÖLD NÖVEKEDÉSI INTÉZET NEVÉBEN ÉS MEGBÍZÁSÁBÓL

 2015. 12. 08.

 2015. 12. 08.”

4. § (1) Ez a törvény - a (2) bekezdésben meghatározott kivétellel - a kihirdetését követő napon lép hatályba.

(2) A 2. § és a 3. § a Megállapodás 17. cikk (1) bekezdésében meghatározott időpontban lép hatályba.

(3) A Megállapodás, valamint a 2. § és a 3. § hatálybalépésének naptári napját a külpolitikáért felelős miniszter - annak ismertté válását követően - a Magyar Közlönyben haladéktalanul közzétett közleményével állapítja meg.

(4) E törvény végrehajtásához szükséges intézkedésekről az energiapolitikáért felelős miniszter gondoskodik.